5
1
0
2

r
p
A
1

]
P
A
.
h
t
a
m

[

3
v
0
9
2
0
.
2
0
4
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

FINITE TIME BLOWUP FOR AN AVERAGED
THREE-DIMENSIONAL NAVIER-STOKES EQUATION

TERENCE TAO

Abstract. The Navier-Stokes equation on the Euclidean space R3 can be expressed in
the form Btu “ ∆u ` Bpu, uq, where B is a certain bilinear operator on divergence-free
vector ﬁelds u obeying the cancellation property xBpu, uq, uy “ 0 (which is equivalent
to the energy identity for the Navier-Stokes equation). In this paper, we consider a
modiﬁcation Btu “ ∆u` ˜Bpu, uq of this equation, where ˜B is an averaged version of the
bilinear operator B (where the average involves rotations, dilations and Fourier multi-
pliers of order zero), and which also obeys the cancellation condition x ˜Bpu, uq, uy “ 0
(so that it obeys the usual energy identity). By analysing a system of ODE related to
(but more complicated than) a dyadic Navier-Stokes model of Katz and Pavlovic, we
construct an example of a smooth solution to such an averaged Navier-Stokes equa-
tion which blows up in ﬁnite time. This demonstrates that any attempt to positively
resolve the Navier-Stokes global regularity problem in three dimensions has to use
ﬁner structure on the nonlinear portion Bpu, uq of the equation than is provided by
harmonic analysis estimates and the energy identity. We also propose a program for
adapting these blowup results to the true Navier-Stokes equations.

1. Introduction

1.1. Statement of main result. The purpose of this paper is to formalise the “super-
criticality” barrier for the (infamous) global regularity problem for the Navier-Stokes
equation, using a blowup solution to a certain averaged version of Navier-Stokes equa-
tion to demonstrate that any proposed positive solution to the regularity problem which
does not use the ﬁner structure of the nonlinearity cannot possibly be successful. This
barrier also suggests a possible route to provide a negative answer to this problem,
that is to say it suggests a program for constructing a blowup solution to the true
Navier-Stokes equations.

The barrier is not particularly sensitive to the precise formulation1 of the regularity
problem, but to state the results in the cleanest fashion we will take the homogeneous
global regularity problem in the Euclidean setting in three spatial dimensions as our
formulation:

[13, (A)] Let ν ą 0, and let u0 :
Conjecture 1.1 (Navier-Stokes global regularity).
R3 Ñ R3 be a divergence-free vector ﬁeld in the Schwartz class. Then there exist a

2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 35Q30.
1See [41] for an analysis of the relationship between diﬀerent formulations of the Navier-Stokes reg-
ularity problem in three dimensions. It is likely that our main results also extend to higher dimensions
than three, although we will not pursue this matter here.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

TERENCE TAO

smooth vector ﬁeld u : r0, `8q ˆ R3 Ñ R3 (the velocity ﬁeld) and smooth function
p : R3 Ñ R (the pressure ﬁeld) obeying the equations

Btu ` pu ¨ ∇qu “ ν∆u ´ ∇p
∇ ¨ u “ 0
up0, ¨q “ u0

(1.1)

as well as the ﬁnite energy condition u P L8

t L2

xpr0, T s ˆ R3q for every 0 ă T ă 8.

By applying the rescaling ˜upt, xq :“ νupνt, xq, ˜ppt, xq :“ νppνt, νxq we may normalise
ν “ 1 (note that there is no smallness requirement on the initial data u0), and we shall
do so henceforth.

To study this conjecture, we perform some standard computations to eliminate the
role of the pressure p, and to pass from the category of smooth (classical) solutions
to the closely related category of mild solutions in a high regularity class. It will not
matter too much what regularity class we take here, as long as it is subcritical, but for
sake of concreteness (and to avoid some very minor technicalities) we will take a quite
df pR3q of (distributional) vector ﬁelds
high regularity space, namely the Sobolev space H 10
u : R3 Ñ R3 with H 10 regularity (thus the weak derivatives ∇ju are square-integrable
for j “ 0, . . . , 10) and which are divergence free in the distributional sense: ∇ ¨ u “ 0.
By using the L2 inner product2

ż

xu, vy :“

u ¨ v dx

R3
on vector ﬁelds u, v : R3 Ñ R3, the dual H 10
order Sobolev space H ´10
regularity. We introduce the Euler bilinear operator B : H 10
via duality as

df pR3q˚ may be identiﬁed with the negative-
pR3q of divergence-free distributions u : R3 Ñ R3 of H ´10
df pR3q˚

df pR3q Ñ H 10

df pR3qˆH 10

df

ż

xBpu, vq, wy :“ ´

1
2

pppu ¨ ∇q vq ¨ wq ` pppv ¨ ∇q uq ¨ wq dx

R3

for u, v, w P H 10
deﬁned. More directly, we can write

df pR3q; it is easy to see from Sobolev embedding that this operator is well

Bpu, vq “ ´

1
2

P rpu ¨ ∇qv ` pv ¨ ∇qus

where P is the Leray projection onto divergence-free vector ﬁelds, deﬁned on square-
integrable u : R3 Ñ R3 by the formula

P ui :“ ui ´ ∆´1BiBjuj
with the usual summation conventions, where ∆´1BiBj is deﬁned as the Fourier mul-
tiplier with symbol ξiξj
|ξ|2 . Note that Bpu, vq takes values in L2pR3q (and not just in
df pR3q. We refer to the form pu, v, wq ÞÑ xBpu, vq, wy as the
H 10
Euler trilinear form. As is well known, we have the important cancellation law

df pR3q˚) when u, v P H 10

xBpu, uq, uy “ 0

(1.2)

2We will not use the H 10
be interpreted in the L2 sense.

df inner product in this paper, thus all appearances of the x, y notation should

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

3

df pR3q, as can be seen by a routine integration by parts exploiting the
for all u P H 10
divergence-free nature of u, with all manipulations being easily justiﬁed due to the high
regularity of u. It will also be convenient to express the Euler trilinear form in terms of
the Fourier transform ˆupξq :“

ş
R3 upxqe´2πix¨ξ dx as

ż

xBpu, vq, wy “ ´πi

Λξ1,ξ2,ξ3pˆupξ1q, ˆvpξ2q, ˆwpξ3qq

(1.3)

ξ1`ξ2`ξ3“0

for all u, v, w P H 10

df pR3q, where we adopt the shorthand

ż

ż

ż

and Λξ1,ξ2,ξ3 : ξK

3 Ñ R is the trilinear form

ξ1`ξ2`ξ3“0
1 ˆ ξK

2 ˆ ξK

F pξ1, ξ2, ξ3q :“

R3

R3

F pξ1, ξ2, ´ξ1 ´ ξ2q dξ1dξ2

Λξ1,ξ2,ξ3pX1, X2, X3q :“ pX1 ¨ ξ2qpX2 ¨ X3q ` pX2 ¨ ξ1qpX1 ¨ X3q,

(1.4)
:“ tXi P R3 : Xi ¨ ξi “ 0u of
deﬁned for vectors Xi in the orthogonal complement ξK
i
ξi for i “ 1, 2, 3; note the divergence-free condition ensures that ˆupξ1q P ξK
1 for (almost)
all ξ1 P R3, and similarly for v and w. This also provides an alternate way to establish
(1.2).

Given a Schwartz divergence-free vector ﬁeld u0 : R3 Ñ R3 and a time interval I Ă
r0, `8q containing 0, we deﬁne a mild H 10 solution to the Navier-Stokes equations (or
df pR3q
mild solution for short) with initial data u0 to be a continuous map u : I Ñ H 10
obeying the integral equation

ż

uptq “ et∆u0 `

t

0

ept´t1q∆Bpupt1q, upt1qq dt1

(1.5)

for all t P I, where et∆ are the usual heat propagators (deﬁned on L2pR3q, for instance);
formally,(1.5) implies the projected Navier-Stokes equation

Btu “ ∆u ` Bpu, uq

up0, ¨q “ u0

(1.6)

in a distributional sense at least (actually, at the H 10
to justify (1.6) in the classical sense for mild solutions).

df level of regularity it is not diﬃcult

The distinction between smooth ﬁnite energy solutions and H 10
df mild solutions is es-
sentially non-existent (at least3 for Schwartz initial data), and the reader may wish
to conﬂate the two notions on a ﬁrst reading. More rigorously, we can reformulate
Conjecture 1.1 as the following logically equivalent conjecture:
Conjecture 1.2 (Navier-Stokes global regularity, again). Let u0 : R3 Ñ R3 be a
divergence-free vector ﬁeld in the Schwartz class. Then there exists a mild solution
u : r0, `8q Ñ H 10

df pR3q to the Navier-Stokes equations with initial data u0.

Lemma 1.3. Conjecture 1.1 and Conjecture 1.2 are equivalent.

3For data which is only in H 10

df , there is a technical distinction between the two solution concepts,
due to a lack of unlimited time regularity at the initial time t “ 0 that is ultimately caused by the
non-local eﬀects of the divergence-free condition ∇ ¨ u “ 0, requiring one to replace the notion of a
smooth solution with that of an almost smooth solution; see [41] for details. However, in this paper we
will only concern ourselves with Schwartz initial data, so that this issue does not arise.

4

TERENCE TAO

Proof. We use the results from [41], although this equivalence is essentially classical and
was previously well known to experts.

Let us ﬁrst show that Conjecture 1.1 implies Conjecture 1.2. Let u0 : R3 Ñ R3 be
a Schwartz divergence-free vector ﬁeld, then by Conjecture 1.1 we may ﬁnd a smooth
vector ﬁeld u : r0, `8q ˆ R3 Ñ R3 and smooth function p : R3 Ñ R obeying the
equations (1.1) and the ﬁnite energy condition. By [41, Corollary 11.1], u is an H 1
xpr0, T s ˆ R3q for all ﬁnite T . By [41, Corollary 4.3], we
solution, that is to say u P L8
then have the integral equation (1.5), and by [41, Theorem 5.4(ii)], u P L8
x pr0, T s ˆ
R3q for every k, which easily implies (from (1.5)) that u is a continuous map from
r0, `8q to H 10

df pR3q. This gives Conjecture 1.2.

t H k

t H 1

Conversely, if Conjecture 1.2 holds, and u0 : R3 Ñ R3 is a Schwartz class solution, we
df pR3q with this initial data. By [41, Theorem
may ﬁnd a mild solution u : r0, `8q Ñ H 10
5.4(ii)], u P L8

x pr0, T s ˆ R3q for every k. If we deﬁne the normalised pressure

t H k

p :“ ´∆´1BiBjpuiujq
then by [41, Theorem 5.4(iv)], u and p are smooth on r0, `8qˆR3, and for each j, k ě 0,
the functions Bj
x pr0, T s ˆ R3q for all ﬁnite T . By diﬀerentiating (1.5),
we have

t p lie in L8

t u, Bj

t H k

Btu “ ∆u ` Bpu, uq

“ ∆u ´ pu ¨ ∇qu ´ ∇p,

and Conjecture 1.1 follows.

(cid:3)

If we take the inner product of (1.6) with u and integrate in time using (1.2), we arrive
at4 the fundamental energy identity

ż

1
2

ż

T

ż

|upT, xq|2 dx `

R3

0

R3

|∇upt, xq|2 dxdt “

|u0pxq|2 dx

(1.7)

R3

ż

1
2

for any mild solution to the Navier-Stokes equation.

If one was unaware of the supercritical nature of the Navier-Stokes equation, one might
attempt to obtain a positive solution to Conjecture 1.1 or Conjecture 1.2 by combining
(1.7) (or equivalently, (1.2)) with various harmonic analysis estimates for the inhomo-
geneous heat equation

Btu “ ∆u ` F

up0, ¨q “ u0
ş
0 ept´t1q∆F pt1q dt1), together with harmonic analysis
(or, in integral form, uptq “ et∆u0 `
estimates for the Euler bilinear operator B, a simple example of which is the estimate

t

`

˘

}Bpu, vq}L2pR3q ď C

}∇u}L4pR3q}v}L4pR3q ` }∇v}L4pR3q}u}L4pR3q

(1.8)

4One has to justify the integration by parts of course, but this is routine under the hypothesis of a

mild solution; we omit the (standard) details.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

5

for some absolute constant C. Such an approach succeeds for instance if the initial data
u0 is suﬃciently small5 in a suitable critical norm (see [29] for an essentially optimal re-
sult in this direction), or if the dissipative operator ´∆ is replaced by a hyperdissipative
operator p´∆qα for some α ě 5{4 (see [25]) or with very slightly less hyperdissipative
operators (see [39]). Unfortunately, standard scaling heuristics (see e.g. [40, §2.4]) have
long indicated to the experts that the energy estimate (1.7) (or (1.2)), together with
the harmonic analysis estimates available for the heat equation and for the Euler bilin-
ear operator B, are not suﬃcient by themselves to aﬃrmatively answer Conjecture 1.1.
However, these scaling heuristics are not formalised as a rigorous barrier to solvability,
and the above mentioned strategy to solve the Navier-Stokes global regularity problem
continues to be attempted on occasion.

The most conclusive way to rule out such a strategy would of course be to demonstrate6
a mild solution to the Navier-Stokes equation that develops a singularity in ﬁnite time,
in the sense that the H 10
df norm of uptq goes to inﬁnity as t approaches a ﬁnite time
T˚. Needless to say, we are unable to produce such a solution. However, we will in this
paper obtain a ﬁnite time blowup (mild) solution to an averaged equation

Btu “ ∆u ` ˜Bpu, uq

up0, ¨q “ u0,

(1.9)

df pR3qˆH 10

df pR3q Ñ H 10

where ˜B : H 10
df pR3q˚ will be a (carefully selected) averaged version
of B that has equal or lesser “strength” from a harmonic analysis point of view (indeed,
˜B obeys slightly more estimates than B does), and which still obeys the fundamen-
tal cancellation property (1.2). Thus, any successful method to aﬃrmatively answer
Conjecture 1.1 (or Conjecture 1.2) must either use ﬁner structure of the Navier-Stokes
equation beyond the general form (1.6), or else must rely crucially on some estimate
or other property of the Euler bilinear operator B that is not shared by the averaged
operator ˜B.

?

We pause to mention some previous blowup results in this direction. If one drops the
cancellation requirement (1.2), so that one no longer has the energy identity (1.7),
then blowup solutions for various Navier-Stokes type equations have been constructed
in the literature. For instance, in [33] ﬁnite time blowup for a “cheap Navier-Stokes
´∆pu2q (with u now a scalar ﬁeld) was constructed in the one-
equation” Btu “ ∆u `
dimensional setting, with the results extended to higher dimensions in [17]. As remarked
in that latter paper, it is essential to the methods of proof that no energy identity is
available. In a slightly diﬀerent direction, ﬁnite time blowup was established in [7] for
a complexiﬁed version of the Navier-Stokes equations, in which the energy identity was
again unavailable (or more precisely, it is available but non-coercive). These models are
not exactly of the type (1.9) considered in this paper, but are certainly very similar in
spirit.

5One can of course also consider other perturbative regimes, in which the solution u is expected
to be close to some other special solution than the zero solution. There is a vast literature in these
directions, see e.g. [9] and the references therein.

6It is a classical fact that mild solutions to a given initial data are unique, see e.g.

[41, Theorem

5.4(iii)].

6

TERENCE TAO

Further models of Navier-Stokes type, which obey an energy identity, were introduced
by Plech´a¸c and S¸ver´ak [35], [36], by Katz and Pavlovic [26], and by Hou and Lei [21]; of
these three, the model in [26] is the most relevant for our work and will be discussed in
detail in Section 1.2 below. These models diﬀer from each other in several respects, but
interestingly, in all three cases there is substantial evidence of blowup in ﬁve and higher
dimensions, but not in three or four dimensions; indeed, for all three of the models
mentioned above there are global regularity results in three dimensions, even in the
presence of blowup results for the corresponding inviscid model. Numerical evidence for
blowup for the Navier-Stokes equations is currently rather scant (except in the inﬁnite
energy setting, see [20], [34]); the blowup evidence is much stronger in the case of the
Euler equations (see [23] for a recent result in this direction, and [22] for a survey), but
it is as yet unclear7 whether these blowup results have direct implications for Navier-
Stokes in the three-dimensional setting, due to the relatively signiﬁcant strength of the
dissipation.

Finally, we mention work [18], [3], [12] establishing ﬁnite time blowup for supercrit-
ical fractal Burgers equations; such equations are not exactly of Navier-Stokes type,
being scalar one-dimensional equations rather than incompressible vector-valued three-
dimensional ones, but from a scaling perspective the results are of the same type, namely
a demonstration of blowup whenever the norms controlled by the conservation and
monotonicity laws are all supercritical.

df pR3q˚ we will consider. We consider three types of symmetries on H 10

We now describe more precisely the type of averaged operator ˜B : H 10
df pR3q Ñ
df pR3q that we
H 10
will average over. Firstly, we have rotation symmetry: if R P SOp3q is a rotation matrix
on R3 and u P H 10

df pR3q, then the rotated vector ﬁeld

df pR3qˆH 10

is also in H 10

df pR3q; note that the Fourier transform also rotates by the same law,

RotRpuqpxq :“ RupR´1xq

{
RotRpuqpξq “ RˆupR´1ξq.

Clearly, these rotation operators are uniformly bounded on H 10
Sobolev space W s,ppR3q with s P R and 1 ă p ă 8.

df pR3q, and also on every

Next, deﬁne a (complex) Fourier multiplier of order 0 to be an operator mpDq deﬁned
on (the complexiﬁcation H 10

df pR3q b C of) H 10
{
mpDqupξq :“ mpξqˆupξq
where m : R3 Ñ C is a function that is smooth away from the origin, with the seminorms
(1.10)

df pR3q by the formula

|ξ|k|∇kmpξq|

}m}k :“ sup
ξ‰0

being ﬁnite for every natural number k. We say that mpDq is real if the symbol m
obeys the symmetry mp´ξq “ mpξq for all ξ P R3zt0u, then mpDq maps H 10
df pR3q to
itself. From the H¨ormander-Mikhlin multiplier theorem (see e.g. [38]), complex Fourier
multipliers of order 0 are also bounded on (the complexiﬁcations of) every Sobolev

7However, in [24], ﬁnite time blowup for a three-dimensional “partially viscous” Navier-Stokes type

model, in which some but not all of the ﬁelds are subject to a viscosity term, was established.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

7

space W s,ppR3q for all s P R and 1 ă p ă 8, with an operator norm that depends
linearly on ﬁnitely many of the }m}k. We let M0 denote the space of all real Fourier
multipliers of order 0, so that M0 b C is the space of complex Fourier multipliers (note
that every complex Fourier multiplier mpDq of order 0 can be uniquely decomposed
as mpDq “ m1pDq ` im2pDq with m1pDq, m2pDq real Fourier multipliers of order 0).
Fourier multipliers of order 0 do not necessarily commute with the rotation operators
RotR, but the group of rotation operators normalises the algebra M0, and hence also
the complexiﬁcation M0 b C.

Finally, we will average8 over the dilation operators

(1.11)
df pR3q norm, but if λ is re-
for λ ą 0. These operators do not quite preserve the H 10
stricted to a compact subset of p0, `8q then these operators (and their inverses) will
be uniformly bounded on H 10

Dilλpuqpxq :“ λ3{2upλxq

df pR3q.

We now deﬁne an averaged Euler bilinear operator to be an operator ˜B : H 10
H 10

df pR3q Ñ H 10
x ˜Bpu, vq, wy :“ E xB pm1pDqRotR1Dilλ1u, m2pDqRotR2Dilλ2vq , m3pDqRotR3Dilλ3wy

df pR3q˚, deﬁned via duality by the formula

df pR3q ˆ

(1.12)
df pR3q, where m1pDq, m2pDq, m3pDq are random real Fourier multi-
for all u, v, w P H 10
pliers of order 0, R1, R2, R3 are random rotations, and λ1, λ2, λ3 are random dilations,
obeying the moment bounds

E}m1}k1}m2}k2}m3}k3 ă 8

and

C ´1 ď λ1, λ2, λ3 ď C
almost surely for any natural numbers k1, k2, k3 and some ﬁnite C. To phrase this
deﬁnition without probabilistic notation, we have

x ˜Bpu, vq, wy “

@

`

˘

D

B

m1,ωpDqRotR1,ω Dilλ1u, m2,ωpDqRotR2,ω Dilλ2v

, m3,ωpDqRotR3,ω Dilλ3w

dµpωq

ż

Ω

(1.13)
for some probability space pΩ, µq and some measurable maps Ri,¨ : Ω Ñ SOp3q, λi,¨ :
Ω Ñ p0, `8q and mi,¨pDq : Ω Ñ M0, where M0 is given the Borel σ-algebra coming
from the seminorms }}k, and one has

ż

and

}m1,ω}k1}m2,ω}k2}m3,ω}k3 dµpωq ă 8

Ω

C ´1 ď λ1pωq, λ2pωq, λ3pωq ă C
for all natural numbers k1, k2, k3. One can also express ˜Bpu, vq without duality by the
formula
˜Bpu, vq “

m1,ωpDqRotR1,ω Dilλ1,ω u, m2,ωpDqRotR2,ω Dilλ2,ω v

m3,ωpDqB

RotR´1

Dilλ´1

ż

˘

`

Ω

3,ω

3,ω

dµpωq

8In an earlier version of this manuscript, no averaging over dilations was assumed, but it was pointed
out to us by the referee that the non-degeneracy condition (3.24) failed if one did not introduce dilation
averaging.

8

TERENCE TAO

where the integral is interpreted in the weak sense (i.e. the Gelfand-Pettis integral).
However, we will not use this formulation of ˜B here.

Remark 1.4. By the rotation symmetry xBpRotRu, RotRvq, RotRwy “ xBpu, vq, wy, we
may eliminate one of the three rotation operators RotRi,ω in (1.13) if desired, and simi-
larly for the dilation operator. By some Fourier analysis (related to the fractional Leib-
niz rule) it should also be possible to eliminate one of the Fourier multipliers mi,ωpDq.
However, we will not attempt to do so here.

From duality, the triangle inequality (or more precisely, Minkowski’s inequality for in-
tegrals), and the H¨ormander-Mikhlin multiplier theorem, we see that every estimate
on the Euler bilinear operator B in Sobolev spaces W s,ppR3q with 1 ă p ă 8 implies
a corresponding estimate for averaged Euler bilinear operators ˜B (but possibly with a
larger constant). For instance, from (1.8) we have

} ˜Bpu, vq}L2pR3q ď C ˜Bp}∇u}L4pR3q}v}L4pR3q ` }∇v}L4pR3q}u}L4pR3qq.

(1.14)

df pR3q, where the constant C ˜B depends9 only on ˜B. A similar argument
for u, v P H 10
shows that the expectation in (1.12) (or the integral in (1.13)) is absolutely convergent
for any u, v, w P H 10

df pR3q.

Similar considerations hold for most other basic bilinear estimates10 on B in popular
function spaces such as H¨older spaces, Besov spaces, or Morrey spaces. Because of this,
the local theory (and related theory, such as the concentration-compactness theory) for
(1.9) is essentially identical to that of (1.6) (up to changes in the explicit constants),
although we will not attempt to formalise this assertion here. In particular, we may
introduce the notion of a mild solution to the averaged Navier-Stokes equation (1.6)
df pR3q on a time interval I Ă r0, `8q containing 0, deﬁned to
with initial data u0 P H 10
be a continuous map u : I Ñ H 10

df pR3q obeying the integral equation

uptq “ et∆u0 `

ż

t

0

ept´t1q∆ ˜Bpupt1q, upt1qq dt1

(1.15)

for all 0 ď t ď T . It is then a routine matter to extend the H 10 local existence and
uniqueness theory (see e.g. [41, §5]) for mild solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations, to
mild solutions of the averaged Navier-Stokes equations, basically because of the previous
observation that all the estimates on B used in that local theory continue to hold for
˜B.

9Note that by applying the transformation pu, ˜Bq Ñ pλu, λ´1 ˜Bq to (1.9), we have the freedom to
multiply ˜B by an arbitrary constant, and so the constants C ˜B appearing in any given estimate such as
(1.14) can be normalised to any absolute constant (e.g. 1) if desired.

10There is a possible exception to this principle if the estimate involves endpoint spaces such as L1
and L8 for which the H¨ormander-Mikhlin multiplier theorem is not available, or non-convex spaces
such as L1,8 for which the triangle inequality is not available. However, as the Leray projection P is
also badly behaved on these spaces, such endpoint spaces rarely appear in these sorts of analyses of
the Navier-Stokes equation.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

9

Because we have not imposed any symmetry or anti-symmetry hypotheses on the aver-
aging measure µ, rotations Rj, and Fourier multipliers mjpDq, the analogue

x ˜Bpu, uq, uy “ 0
of the cancellation condition (1.2) is not automatically satisﬁed. If however we have
df pR3q, then mild solutions to (1.9) enjoy the same energy identity
(1.16) for all u P H 10
(1.7) as mild solutions to the true Navier-Stokes equation.

(1.16)

We are now ready to state the main result of the paper.

Theorem 1.5 (Finite time blowup for an averaged Navier-Stokes equation). There
exists a symmetric averaged Euler bilinear operator ˜B : H 10
df pR3q˚
df pR3q, and a Schwartz divergence-
obeying the cancellation property (1.16) for all u P H 10
free vector ﬁeld u0, such that there is no global-in-time mild solution u : r0, `8q Ñ
H 10

df pR3q to the averaged Navier-Stokes equation (1.9) with initial data u0.

df pR3q Ñ H 10

df pR3q ˆ H 10

In fact, the arguments used to prove the above theorem can be pushed a little further
df pR3q for some 0 ă T˚ ă 8 that
to construct a smooth mild solution u : r0, T˚q Ñ H 10
blows up (at the spatial origin) as t approaches T˚ (and with subcritical norms such as
}uptq}H 10

df pR3q diverging to inﬁnity as t Ñ T˚).

Remark 1.6. One can also rewrite the averaged Navier-Stokes equation (1.9) in a form
more closely resembling (1.1), namely

Btu ` T pu, uq “ ∆u ´ ∇p
∇ ¨ u “ 0
up0, ¨q “ u0

where T is an averaged version of the convection operator pu ¨ ∇qu, deﬁned by T “
1
2pT12 ` T21q where
ż

`

˘
pmi,ωpDqRotRi,ω u ¨ ∇qmj,ωpDqRotRj,ω u

dµpωq

Tijpu, uq :“

RotR´1

3,ω

m3,ωpDq

Ω

for ij “ 12, 21. We can also ensure that the inviscid form of the averaged Navier-
Stokes equation conserves helicity, as well as total momentum, angular momentum, and
vorticity; see Remark 4.3 below.

df pR3q ˆ H 10

df pR3q Ñ H 10

Our construction of this averaged bilinear operator ˜B : H 10
df pR3q˚
and blowup solution u will admittedly be rather artiﬁcial, as the averaged operator
˜B will only retain a carefully chosen (and carefully weighted) subset of the nonlinear
interactions present in the original operator B, with the weights designed to facilitate
a speciﬁc blowup mechanism while suppressing other nonlinear interactions that could
potentially disrupt this mechanism. There is however a possibility that the proof strat-
egy in Theorem 1.5 could be adapted to the true Navier-Stokes equations; see Section
1.3 below. Even without this possibility, however, we view this result as a signiﬁcant
(but not completely inpenetrable) barrier to a certain class of strategies for excluding
such blowup based on treating the bilinear Euler operator B abstractly, as it shows
that any strategy that fails to distinguish between the Euler bilinear operator B and

10

TERENCE TAO

its averaged counterparts ˜B (assuming that the averages obey the cancellation (1.16))
is doomed to failure. We emphasise however that this barrier does not rule out ar-
guments that crucially exploit speciﬁc properties of the Navier-Stokes equation that
are not shared by the averaged versions. For instance, the arguments in [16] (see also
the subsequent paper [28] for an alternate treatment), which establish global regularity
for Navier-Stokes subject to a hypothesis of bounded critical norm, rely on a unique
continuation property for backwards heat equations which in turn relies on being able
to control the nonlinearity pointwise in terms of the solution and its ﬁrst derivatives.
This is a particular feature of the Navier-Stokes equation (1.1) (in vorticity formulation)
which is diﬃcult to discern from the projected formulation (1.6), and does not hold in
general in (1.9); in particular, it is not obvious to the author whether the main results
in [16] extend11 to averaged Navier-Stokes equations. As such, arguments based on such
unique continuation properties are (currently, at least) examples of approaches to the
regularity problem that are not manifestly subject to this barrier (unless progress is
made on the program outlined in Section 1.3 below). Another example of a positive
recent result on the Navier-Stokes problem that uses the ﬁner structure of the nonlin-
earity (and is thus not obviously subject to this barrier) is the work in [9] constructing
large data smooth solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations in which the initial data
varies slowly in one direction, and which relies on certain delicate algebraic properties
of the symbol of B.

1.2. Overview of proof. The philosophy of proof of Theorem 1.5 is to treat the dis-
sipative term ∆u of (1.9) as a perturbative error (which is possible thanks to the su-
percritical nature of the energy, due to the fact that we are in more than two spatial
dimensions), and to construct a stable blowup solution to the “averaged Euler equation”
Btu “ ˜Bpu, uq that blows up so rapidly that the eﬀect of adding a dissipation12 term
is negligible. This blowup solution will have a signiﬁcant portion of its energy concen-
trating on smaller and smaller balls around the spatial origin x “ 0; more precisely,
there will be an increasing sequence of times tn converging exponentially fast to a ﬁnite
limit T˚, such that a large fraction of the energy (at least p1 ` (cid:15)0q´εn for some small
ε, (cid:15)0 ą 0) is concentrated in the ball Bp0, p1 ` (cid:15)0q´nq centred at the origin. We will
be able to make the diﬀerence tn`1 ´ tn of the order p1 ` (cid:15)0qp´ 5
2 `Opεqqn for some small
ε ą 0; this is about as short as one can hope from scaling heuristics (see e.g. [39] for a
discussion), and indicates a blowup which is almost as rapid and eﬃcient as possible,
given the form of the nonlinearity. In particular, for large n, the time diﬀerence tn`1 ´tn
will be signiﬁcantly shorter than the dissipation time p1 ` (cid:15)0q´2n at that spatial scale,
which helps explain why the eﬀect of the dissipative term ∆u will be negligible.

11This would not be in contradiction to Theorem 1.5, as the blowup solution constructed in the
proof of that theorem is of “Type II” in the sense that critical norms of the solution uptq diverge in
the limit t Ñ T˚. In contrast, the results in [16] rules out “Type I” blowup, in which a certain critical
norm stays bounded.

12Indeed, our arguments permit one to add any supercritical hyperdissipation p´∆qα, α ă 5{4, to
the equation (1.9) while still obtaining blowup for certain choices of initial data, although for sake of
exposition we will only discuss the classical α “ 1 case here.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

11

To construct the stable blowup solution, we were motivated by the work on regularity
and blowup of the system of ODE

n´1 ´ λnXnXn`1

BtXn “ ´λ2nαXn ` λn´1X 2

(1.17)
for a system pXnqnPZ of scalar unknown functions Xn : r0, T˚q Ñ R, where λ ą 1 and
α ą 0 are parameters. This system was introduced by Katz-Pavlovic [26] (with λ “ 2
and α “ 2{5) as a dyadic model13 for the Navier-Stokes equations (1.1), and are related
to hierarchical shell models for these equations (see also [11] for an earlier derivation
of these equations from Fourier-analytic considerations). Roughly speaking, a solution
pXnqnPZ to this system (with α “ 2{5) corresponds (at a heuristic level) to a solution u
to an equation similar to (1.6) or (1.9) with u of the shape

ÿ

upt, xq «

n

Xnptqλ3n{5ψpλ2n{5xq

(1.18)

for some Schwartz function ψ with Fourier transform vanishing near the origin. We
remark that the analogue of the energy identity (1.7) in this setting is the identity

ż

1
2

ÿ

n

XnpT q2 `

0

n

ÿ

T

λ2nαXnptq2dt “

1
2

ÿ

n

Xnp0q2,

(1.19)

valid whenever Xn exhibits suﬃcient decay as n Ñ ˘8 (we do not formalise this
statement here).

We will defer for now the technical issue (which we regard as being of secondary im-
portance) of transferring blowup results from dyadic Navier-Stokes models to averaged
Navier-Stokes models, and focus on the question of whether blowup solutions may be
constructed for ODE systems such as (1.17).

Blowup solutions for the equation (1.17) are known to exist for suﬃciently small α;
speciﬁcally, for α ă 1{4 this was (essentially) established in [26], while for α ă 1{3 this
was established in [10], with global regularity established in the critical and subcritical
regimes α ě 1{2. If a blowup solution could be constructed14 with the value α “ 2{5,
then this would be a dyadic analogue of Theorem 1.5. Unfortunately for our purposes,
for the values λ “ 21{α, α “ 2{5, global regularity was established in [4] (for non-
negative initial data Xnp0q), by carefully identifying a region of phase space that is
invariant under forward evolution of (1.17), and which in particular prevents the energy
Xn from concentrating too strongly at a single value of n. However, the argument in [4]

13Strictly speaking, the equation studied in [26] is slightly diﬀerent, in that there is a nonlinear
interaction between each wavelet in the model and all of the children of that wavelet, whereas the
model here corresponds to the case where each wavelet interacts with only one of its children at most.
The equation in [26] turns out to be a bit more dispersive than the model (1.17), and in particular
enjoys global regularity (by an unpublished argument of Nazarov), and is thus not directly suitable as
a model for proving Theorem 1.5.

14The results in [26] can be however adapted to establish a version of Theorem 1.5 in six and higher
dimensions, while the results in [10] give a version in ﬁve and higher dimensions (and just barely miss
the four-dimensional case); this can be done by adapting the arguments in this paper (and using the
above-cited blowup results as a substitute for the lengthier ODE analysis in this paper), and we leave
the details to the interested reader. Interestingly, the results in [35], [36] on a somewhat diﬀerent Navier-
Stokes type model also indicate blowup in ﬁve and higher dimensions, while giving global regularity
instead in lower dimensions; similarly for a third Navier-Stokes model introduced in [21].

12

TERENCE TAO

is sensitive to the speciﬁc numerical value of λ (and also relies heavily on the assumption
of initial non-negativity), and does not rule out the possibility of blowup at α “ 2{5 for
some variant of the system (1.17).

From multiplying (1.17) by Xn, we arrive at the energy transfer equations

˙

ˆ

Bt

1
2

X 2
n

“ ´λ2nαX 2

n ` λn´1XnX 2

n´1 ´ λnXn`1X 2

n

(1.20)

for n P Z, which are a local version of (1.19), and reveal in particular (in the non-negative
n from the nth mode Xn
case Xn ě 0) that there is a ﬂow of energy at rate λnXn`1X 2
to the pn ` 1qst mode Xn`1. In principle, whenever one is in the supercritical regime
α ă 1{2, one should be able to start with a delta function initial data Xnp0q “ 1n“n0
for some suﬃciently large n0, and then this transfer of energy should allow for a “low-
to-high frequency cascade” solution in which the energy moves rapidly from the nth
0
mode to the pn0 ` 1qst mode, with the cascade fast enough to “outrun” the dissipative
eﬀect of the term ´λ2nαX 2
n in the energy transfer equation (1.20), which is lower order
when α ă 1{2. However, as observed in [4], this cascade scenario does not actually
occur as strongly as the above heuristic reasoning suggests, because the energy in Xn`1
is partially transferred to Xn`2 before the transfer of energy from Xn to Xn`1 is fully
complete, leading instead to a solution in which the bulk of the energy remains in low
values of n and is eventually dissipated away by the ´λ2nαX 2
n term before forming a
singularity. Thus we see that there is an interference eﬀect between the energy transfer
between Xn and Xn`1, and the energy transfer between Xn`1 and Xn`2, that disrupts
the naive blowup scenario.

One can ﬁx this problem by suitably modifying the model equation (1.17). One rather
drastic (and not particularly satisfactory) way to do this is to forcibly (i.e., exogenously)
shut oﬀ most of the nonlinear interactions, so that only one pair Xn, Xn`1 of adjacent
modes experiences a nonlinear (but energy-conserving) interaction at any given time.
Speciﬁcally, one can consider a truncated-nonlinearity ODE

BtXn “ ´λ2nαXn ` 1n´1“nptqλn´1X 2

n´1 ´ 1n“nptqλnXnXn`1

(1.21)

where n : r0, T˚q Ñ Z is a piecewise constant function that one speciﬁes in advance, and
which describes which pair of modes Xnptq, Xnptq`1 is “allowed” to interact at a given
time t. It is not diﬃcult to construct a blowup solution for this truncated ODE; we
do so in Section 5.2. Such a result corresponds to a weak version of Theorem 1.5 in
which the averaged nonlinearity ˜B is now allowed to be time dependent, ˜B “ ˜Bptq, with
the dependence of ˜Bptq on t being piecewise constant (and experiencing an unbounded
number of discontinuities as t approaches T˚). In particular, the nonlinearity ˜Bptq is
experiencing an exogenous oscillatory singularity in time as t approaches T˚, making
the spatial singularity of the solution u become signiﬁcantly less surprising15.

15It is worth noting, however, that a surprisingly large portion of the local theory for Navier-Stokes
would survive with a time-dependent nonlinearity, even if it were discontinuous in time, so even this
weakened version of Theorem 1.5 provides a somewhat non-trivial barrier that can still exclude certain
solution strategies to the Navier-Stokes regularity problem.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

13

Our strategy, then, is to design a system of ODE similar to (1.17) that can endogenously
simulate the exogenous truncations 1n´1“nptq, 1n“nptq of (1.21). As shown in [4], this
cannot be done for the scalar equation (1.17), at least when λ is equal to 2. However,
by replacing (1.17) with a vector-valued generalisation, in which one has four scalar
functions X1,nptq, X2,nptq, X3,nptq, X4,nptq associated to each scale n, rather than a single
scalar function Xnptq, it turns out to be possible to use quadratic interactions of the
same strength as the terms λn´1X 2
n´1, λnXnXn`1 appearing in (1.17) to induce such
a simulation, while still respecting the energy identity. The precise system of ODE
used is somewhat complicated (see Section 6), but it can be described as a sequence of
“quadratic circuits” connected in series, with each circuit built out of a small number
of “quadratic logic gates”, each corresponding to a certain type of basic quadratic
nonlinear interaction. Speciﬁcally, we will combine together some “pump” gates that
transfer energy from one mode to another (and which are the only gate present in (1.17))
with “ampliﬁer” gates (that use one mode to ignite exponential growth in another mode)
and “rotor” gates (that use one mode to rotate the energy between two other modes).
By combining together these gates with carefully chosen coupling constants (a sort
of “quadratic engineering” task somewhat analogous to the more linear circuit design
tasks in electrical engineering), we can set up a transfer of energy from scale n to scale
n ` 1 which can be made arbitrarily abrupt, in that the duration of the time interval
separating the regime in which most of the energy is at scale n, and most of the energy
is at scale n ` 1, can be made as small as desired. Furthermore, this transfer is delayed
somewhat from the time at which the scale n ﬁrst experiences a large inﬂux of energy.
The combination of the delay in energy transfer and the abruptness of that transfer
means that the process of transferring energy from scale n to scale n ` 1 is not itself
interrupted (up to negligible errors) by the process of transferring energy from scale
n ` 1 to n ` 2, and this permits us (after a lengthy bootstrap argument) to construct a
blowup solution to this equation, which resembles the blowup solution for the truncated
ODE (1.21).

We now brieﬂy discuss how to pass from the dyadic model problem of establishing
blowup for a variant of (1.17) to a problem of the form (1.9), though as noted before we
view the dyadic analysis as containing the core results of the paper, with the conversion
to the non-dyadic setting being primarily for aesthetic reasons (and to eliminate any
lingering suspicion that the blowup here is arising from some purely dyadic phenomenon
that is somehow not replicable in the non-dyadic setup). By using an ansatz of the form
(1.18) and rewriting everything in Fourier space, one can map the dyadic model problem
to a problem similar to (1.9), but with the Laplacian replaced by a “dyadic Laplacian”
(similar to the one appearing in [26], [14]), and with a bilinear operator ˜B which has a
Fourier representation

ż ż ż

x ˜Bpu, vq, wy “

˜mpξ1, ξ2, ξ3qpˆupξ1q, ˆvpξ2q, ˆwpξ3qq dξ1dξ2dξ3

for a certain tensor-valued symbol ˜mpξ1, ξ2, ξ3q that is supported on the region of fre-
quency space where ξ1, ξ2, ξ3 are comparable in magnitude, and having magnitude „ |ξ1|

14

TERENCE TAO

in that region (together with the usual estimates on derivatives of the symbol). Mean-
while, thanks to (1.3), B has a similar representation

ż ż ż

xBpu, vq, wy “

mpξ1, ξ2, ξ3qpˆupξ1q, ˆvpξ2q, ˆwpξ3qq dξ1dξ2dξ3

with m being a singular (tensor-valued) distribution on the hyperplane ξ1 ` ξ2 ` ξ3 “ 0.
After averaging over some rotations, one can16 “smear out” the distribution m to be
absolutely continuous with respect to dξ1dξ2dξ3, and then by suitably modulating by
Fourier multipliers of order 0 (and in particular, diﬀerentiation operators of imaginary
order) one can localise the symbol to the region of frequency space where ξ1, ξ2, ξ3 are
comparable in magnitude. By performing some suitable Fourier-type decompositions of
the latter symbol, we are then able to express ˜m as an average of various transformations
of m, giving rise to a description of ˜B as an averaged Navier-Stokes operator. Ultimately,
the problem boils down to the task of establishing a certain non-degeneracy property
of the tensor symbol Λ deﬁned in (1.4), which one establishes by a short geometric
calculation. The averaging over dilations in Theorem 1.5 is needed in order to ensure
this non-degeneracy property, but it is likely that this averaging can be dropped by a
more careful analysis.

This almost ﬁnishes the proof of Theorem 1.5, except that the dyadic model equation
involves the dyadic Laplacian instead of the Euclidean Laplacian. However, it turns out
that the analysis of the dyadic system of ODE can be adapted to the case of non-dyadic
dissipation, by using local energy inequalities as a substitute for the exact ODE that
appear in the dyadic model. While this complicates the analysis slightly, the eﬀect is
ultimately negligible due to the perturbative nature of the dissipation.

1.3. A program for establishing blowup for the true Navier-Stokes equations?
To summarise the strategy of proof of Theorem 1.5, a solution to a carefully chosen
averaged version

Btu “ ˜Bpu, uq
of the Euler equations is constructed which behaves like a “von Neumann machine”
(that is, a self-replicating machine) in the following sense: at a given time tn, it evolves
as a sort of “quadratic computer”, made out of “quadratic logic gates”, which is “pro-
grammed” so that after a reasonable period of time tn`1 ´ tn, it abruptly “replicates”
into a rescaled version of itself (being 1 ` (cid:15)0 times smaller, and about p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2 times
faster), while also erasing almost completely the previous iteration of this machine. This
replication process is stable with respect to perturbations, and in particular can survive
the presence of a supercritical dissipation if the initial scale of the machine is suﬃciently
small.

This suggests an ambitious (but not obviously impossible) program (in both senses of
the word) to achieve the same eﬀect for the true Navier-Stokes equations, thus obtaining

16For minor technical and notational reasons, the formal version of this argument performed in
Section 3 does not quite perform these steps in the order indicated here, however all the ingredients
mentioned here are still used at some point in the rigorous argument.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

15

a negative answer to Conjecture 1.1. Deﬁne an ideal (incompressible, inviscid) ﬂuid to
be a divergence-free vector ﬁeld u that evolves according to the true Euler equations

Btu “ Bpu, uq.

Somewhat analogously to how a quantum computer can be constructed from the laws
[8]), or a Turing machine can be constructed from
of quantum mechanics (see e.g.
cellular automata such as Conway’s “Game of Life” (see e.g.
[2]), one could hope to
design logic gates entirely out of ideal ﬂuid (perhaps by using suitably shaped vortex
sheets to simulate the various types of physical materials one would use in a mechanical
computer). If these gates were suﬃciently “Turing complete”, and also “noise-tolerant”,
one could then hope to combine enough of these gates together to “program” a von
Neumann machine consisting of ideal ﬂuid that, when it runs, behaves qualitatively
like the blowup solution used to establish Theorem 1.5. Note that such replicators, as
well as the related concept of a universal constructor, have been built within cellular
automata such as the “Game of Life”; see e.g. [1].

Once enough logic gates of ideal ﬂuid are constructed, it seems that the main diﬃculties
in executing the above program are of a “software engineering” nature, and would be in
principle achievable, even if the details could be extremely complicated in practice. The
main mathematical diﬃculty in executing this “ﬂuid computing” program would thus
be to arrive at (and rigorously certify) a design for logical gates of inviscid ﬂuid that
has some good noise tolerance properties. In this regard, ideas from quantum comput-
ing (which faces a unitarity constraint somewhat analogous to the energy conservation
constraint for ideal ﬂuids, albeit with the key diﬀerence of having a linear evolution
rather than a nonlinear one) may prove to be useful.

A signiﬁcant (but perhaps not insuperable) obstacle to this program is that in addition
to the conservation of energy, the Euler equations obey a number of additional conser-
vation laws, such as conservation of helicity, with vortex lines also being transported by
the ﬂow; see e.g. [32]. This places additional limitations on the type of ﬂuid gates one
could hope to construct; however, as these conservation laws are indeﬁnite in sign, it
may still be possible to design computational gates that respect all of these laws.

It is worth pointing out, however, that even if this program is successful, it would
only demonstrate blowup for a very speciﬁc type of initial data (and tiny perturbations
thereof), and is not necessarily in contradiction with the belief that one has global regu-
larity for most choices of initial data (for some carefully chosen deﬁnition of “most”, e.g.
with overwhelming (but not almost sure) probability with respect to various probability
distributions of initial data). However, we do not have any new ideas to contribute on
how to address this latter question, other than to state the obvious fact that deter-
ministic methods alone are unlikely to be suﬃcient to resolve the problem, and that
stochastic methods (e.g. those based on invariant measures) are probably needed.

1.4. Acknowledgments. I thank Nets Katz for helpful discussions, Zhen Lei and Gre-
gory Seregin for help with the references, and the anonymous referee for a careful read-
ing and pointing out an error in a previous version of this manuscript. The author
is supported by a Simons Investigator grant, the James and Carol Collins Chair, the

16

TERENCE TAO

Mathematical Analysis & Application Research Fund Endowment, and by NSF grant
DMS-1266164.

2. Notation

We use X “ OpY q or X À Y to denote the estimate |X| ď CY , for some quantity C
(which we call the implied constant). If we need the implied constant to depend on a
parameter (e.g. k), we will either indicate this convention explicitly in the text, or use
subscripts, e.g. X “ OkpY q or X Àk Y .

If ξ is an element of R3, we use |ξ| to denote its Euclidean magnitude. For ξ0 P R3 and
r ą 0, we use Bpξ0, rq :“ tξ P R3 : |ξ ´ ξ0| ă ru to denote the open ball of radius r
centred at ξ0. Given a subset B of R3 and a real number λ, we use λ ¨ B :“ tλξ : ξ P Bu
to denote the dilate of B by λ.

If P is a mathematical statement, we use 1P to denote the quantity 1 when P is true
and 0 when P is false.

Given two real vector spaces V, W , we deﬁne the tensor product V b W to be the real
vector space spanned by formal tensor products v b w with v P V and w P W , subject
to the requirement that the map pv, wq ÞÑ v b w is bilinear. Thus for instance V b C is
the complexiﬁcation of V , that is to say the space of formal linear combinations v1 ` iv2
with v1, v2 P V .

3. Averaging the Euler bilinear operator

In this section we show that certain bilinear operators, which are spatially localised
variants of the “cascade operators” introduced in [26], can be viewed as averaged Euler
bilinear operators.

We now formalise the class of local cascade operators we will be working with. For
technical reasons, we will use the integer powers p1 ` (cid:15)0qn of 1 ` (cid:15)0 for some suﬃciently
small (cid:15)0 ą 0 as our dyadic range of scales, rather than the more traditional powers of two,
2n. Roughly speaking, the reason for this is to ensure that any triangle of side lengths
that are of comparable size, in the sense that they all between p1 ` (cid:15)0qn´Op1q and p1 `
(cid:15)0qn`Op1q for some n, are almost equilateral; this lets us avoid some degeneracies in the
tensor symbol implicit in (1.3) that would otherwise complicate the task of expressing
certain bilinear operators as averages of the Euler bilinear operator B (speciﬁcally, the
smallness of (cid:15)0 is needed to establish the non-degeneracy condition (3.24) below).

Deﬁnition 3.1 (Local cascade operators). Let (cid:15)0 ą 0. A basic local cascade operator
df pR3q Ñ
(with dyadic scale parameter (cid:15)0 ą 0) is a bilinear operator C : H 10
H 10

df pR3q ˆ H 10

df pR3q˚ deﬁned via duality by the formula
xCpu, vq, wy “

ÿ

p1 ` (cid:15)0q5n{2xu, ψ1,nyxv, ψ2,nyxw, ψ3,ny

(3.1)

nPZ

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

17

for all u, v, w P H 10
function

df pR3q, where for i “ 1, 2, 3 and n P Z, ψi,n : R3 Ñ R3 is the L2-rescaled

ψi,npxq :“ p1 ` (cid:15)0q3n{2ψi pp1 ` (cid:15)0qnxq
and ψi : R3 Ñ R3 is a Schwartz function whose Fourier transform is supported on the
annulus tξ : 1 ´ 2(cid:15)0 ď |ξ| ď 1 ` 2(cid:15)0u. A local cascade operator is deﬁned to be a ﬁnite
linear combination of basic local cascade operators.

Note from the Plancherel theorem that one has

ÿ

p1 ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q2nq10|xu, ψ1,ny|2 ă 8

n

df pR3q and ψ1,n is as in Deﬁnition 3.1. Similarly for ψ2,n and ψ3,n. From
whenever u P H 10
this and the H¨older inequality it is an easy matter to ensure that the sum in (3.1) is
df pR3q, so the deﬁnition of a cascade operator is
absolutely convergent for any u, v, w P H 10
df pR3q˚;
df pR3qˆH 10
well-deﬁned, and that such operators are bounded from H 10
df pR3q to L2pR3q.
indeed, the same argument shows that such operators map H 10
df pR3q,
(One could in fact extend such operators to signiﬁcantly rougher spaces than H 10
but we will not need to do so here.)

df pR3q to H 10

df pR3qˆH 10

We did not impose that the ψi were divergence free, but one could easily do so via Leray
projections if desired, in which case the operators Cpu, vq deﬁned via duality in (3.1)
can be expressed more directly as
ÿ

Cpu, vq “

p1 ` (cid:15)0q5n{2xu, ψ1,nyxv, ψ2,nyψ3,n.

nPZ

We remark that the exponent 5{2 appearing in (3.1) ensures that local cascade operators
enjoy a dyadic version of the scale invariance that the Euler bilinear form enjoys. Indeed,
df pR3q,
recalling the dilation operators (1.11), one can compute that for any u, v, w P H 10
one has

xBpDilλu, Dilλvq, Dilλwy “ λ5{2xBpu, vq, wy,

and similarly for any local cascade operator C one has

xCpDilλu, Dilλvq, Dilλwy “ λ5{2xCpu, vq, wy,

under the additional restriction that λ is an integer power of 1 ` (cid:15)0.

Theorem 1.5 is then an immediate consequence of the following two results.

Theorem 3.2 (Local cascade operators are averaged Euler operators). Let (cid:15)0 ą 0 be
a suﬃciently small absolute constant. Then every local cascade operator (with dyadic
scale parameter (cid:15)0) is an averaged Euler bilinear operator.

Theorem 3.3 (Blowup for a local cascade equation). Let 0 ă (cid:15)0 ă 1. Then there exists
df pR3q˚ (with dyadic
a symmetric local cascade operator C : H 10
scale parameter (cid:15)0) obeying the cancellation property

df pR3q Ñ H 10

df pR3q ˆ H 10

xCpu, uq, uy “ 0

(3.2)

18

TERENCE TAO

for all u P H 10
not exist any global mild solution u : r0, `8q Ñ H 10

df pR3q, and Schwartz divergence-free vector ﬁeld u0, such that there does

df pR3q to the initial value problem

Btu “ ∆u ` Cpu, uq

up0, ¨q “ u0,

(3.3)

that is to say there does not exist any continuous u : r0, `8q Ñ H 10

df pR3q with

uptq “ et∆u0 `

0

for all t P r0, `8q.

ż

t

ept´t1q∆C pupt1q, upt1qq dt1

Theorem 3.3 is the main technical result of this paper, and its proof will occupy the
subsequent sections of this paper. In this section we establish Theorem 3.2. This will be
done by a somewhat lengthy series of averaging arguments and Fourier decompositions,
together with some elementary three-dimensional geometry, with the result ultimately
following from a certain non-degeneracy property of the trilinear form Λ deﬁned in (1.4);
the arguments are unrelated to those in the rest of the paper, and readers may wish to
initially skip this section and move on to the rest of the argument.

Henceforth (cid:15)0 ą 0 will be assumed to be suﬃciently small (e.g. (cid:15)0 “ 10´10 will suﬃce).
In this section, the implied constants in the Opq notation are not permitted to depend
on (cid:15)0.

3.1. First step: complexiﬁcation. It will be convenient to complexify the problem
in order to freely use Fourier-analytic tools at later stages of the argument. To this end,
we introduce the following notation.

df pR3q b C Ñ
Deﬁnition 3.4 (Complex averaging). Let C, C 1
df pR3q˚ b C be bounded (complex-)bilinear operators. We say that C is a complex
H 10
average of C 1 if there exists a ﬁnite measure space pΩ, µq and measurable functions
mi,¨pDq : Ω Ñ M0 b C, Ri,¨ : Ω Ñ SOp3q, λi,¨ : Ω Ñ p0, `8q for i “ 1, 2, 3 such that

df pR3q b C ˆ H 10

: H 10

ż

xCpu, vq, wy “
@

`

Ω

˘

C 1

m1,ωpDqRotR1,ω Dilλ1,ω u, m2,ωpDqRotR2,ω Dilλ2,ω v

, m3,ωpDqRotR3,ω Dilλ3,ω w

D

dµpωq,
(3.4)

and that one has the integrability conditions

ż

}m1,ωpDq}k1}m2,ωpDq}k2}m3,ωpDq}k3 dµpωq ă 8

(3.5)

and

Ω

0 ď λ1pωq, λ2pωq, λ3pωq ď C0
for any natural numbers k1, k2, k3 (recall that the seminorms }}k on M0 bC were deﬁned
in (1.10)) and some ﬁnite C0. Here, we complexify the inner product x, y by deﬁning

C ´1

ż

xu, vy :“

R3

upxq ¨ vpxq dx

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

19

df pR3q b C; note that we do not place a complex con-
for complex vector ﬁelds u, v P H 10
jugate on the v factor, so the inner product is complex bilinear rather than sesquilinear.

Suppose we can show that every local cascade operator C is a complex average of the
Euler bilinear operator B in the sense of the above deﬁnition. The multipliers mj,ωpDq
for j “ 1, 2, 3 appearing in the expansion (3.4) are not required to be real, but we
can decompose them as mj,ω,1pDq ` imj,ω,2pDq where mj,ω,1pDq, mj,ω,2pDq are real (and
with the seminorms of mj,ω,1pDq, mj,ω,2pDq bounded by a multiple of the corresponding
seminorm of mj,ωpDq). Thus we can decompose the right-hand side of (3.4) as the sum
of 23 “ 8 pieces, each of which is of the same form as the original right-hand side up
to a power of i, and with all the mj,ωpDq appearing in each piece being a real Fourier
multiplier. As the left-hand side of (3.4) is real (as are the inner products on the right-
hand side), we may eliminate all the terms on the right-hand side involving odd powers
of i by taking real parts. The power of i in each of the four remaining terms is now
just a sign ˘1 and can be absorbed into the m1,ωpDq factor; by concatenating together
four copies of pΩ, µq we may now obtain an expansion of the form (3.4) in which all the
mj,ωpDq are real. Finally, by multiplying m1,ωpDq by a normalising constant we may
take pΩ, µq to be a probability space rather than a ﬁnite measure space. Combining all
these manipulations, we conclude Theorem 3.2. Thus, it will suﬃce to show that every
local cascade operator is a complex average of the Euler bilinear operator B.

3.2. Second step: frequency localisation. By again using m1,ωpDq to absorb scalar
factors, we see that if C is a complex average of C 1, then any complex scalar multiple
of C is a complex average of C 1; also, by concatenating ﬁnite measure spaces together
we see from Deﬁnition 3.4 that if C1, C2 are both complex averages of C 1, then C1 ` C2
is an complex average of C 1. Thus the space of averages of the Euler bilinear operator
is closed under ﬁnite linear combinations, and so it will suﬃce to show that every basic
local cascade operator is a complex average of the Euler bilinear operator.

By decomposing the ψj, j “ 1, 2, 3 in (3.4) into ﬁnitely many (complex-valued) pieces,
we may replace the basic local cascade operator with the complexiﬁed basic local cascade
operator C deﬁned by

ÿ

xCpu, vq, wy “

p1 ` (cid:15)0q5n{2xu, ψ1,nyxv, ψ2,nyxw, ψ3,ny,

(3.6)

nPZ

where each ψj : R3 Ñ C3 is now a Schwartz complex vector ﬁeld with Fourier transform
ˆψj supported on the ball Bpξ0
j P R3 with magnitude comparable
0q for some non-zero ξ0
to 1. Henceforth we ﬁx C to be such a complexiﬁed basic local cascade operator. Note
that due to the presence of rotations and dilations in the deﬁnition of a complex average,
we have the freedom to rotate each and dilate each of the ξ0
j as we please. We shall
select the normalisation

j , (cid:15)3

ξ0
1 “ p0, 1, 0q
ξ0
2 “ p´1, ´1, 0q
ξ0
3 “ p1, 0, 0q

(3.7)

20

TERENCE TAO

Figure 1. The frequencies ξ0
2, ξ0
3. The frequency variables ξj (and
later on, the normalised frequencies ˜ξj) will be localised to within Op(cid:15)3
0q
of ξ0
j ; this localisation is represented schematically in this ﬁgure by the
circles around the reference frequencies ξ0
j .

1, ξ0

so that in particular

1 ` ξ0
ξ0

2 ` ξ0
see Figure 1. The exact normalisation in (3.7) is somewhat arbitrary, but the vanishing
2, ξ0
(3.8) is convenient for technical reasons; also, it is necessary to ensure that ξ0
3
have distinct magnitudes in order to avoid a certain degeneracy later in the argument
(namely, the failure of (3.24) below).

3 “ 0;

1, ξ0

(3.8)

Once we perform this normalisation, we will have no further need of averaging over
dilations, and will rely purely on Fourier and rotation averaging to obtain the required
representation of the cascade operator C.

Note that M0 b C is closed under composition, and from (1.10) and the Leibniz rule
we have the inequalities

kÿ

kÿ

}mpDqm1pDq}k ď Ck

}mpDq}k1}m1pDq}k2

k1“0

k2“0

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

21

for all natural numbers k and all mpDq, m1pDq P M0 b C (where Ck depends only on k).
From this, Fubini’s theorem, and H¨older’s inequality, together with the observation that
rotation and dilation operators normalise M0 b C, we have the following transitivity
property: if C1 is a complex average of C2, and C2 is a complex average of C3, then C1
is a complex average of C3. Our proof strategy will exploit this transitivity by passing
from the Euler bilinear operator B to the local cascade operator C in stages, performing
a sequence of averaging operations on B to gradually make it resemble the local cascade
operator.

3.3. Third step: forcing frequency comparability. We now use some diﬀerential
operators of imaginary order to localise the frequencies ξ1, ξ2, ξ3 to be comparable to
each other in magnitude. Let ϕ : R Ñ R be a smooth function supported on r´2, 2s
that equals one on r´1, 1s. We then deﬁne the function η : p0, `8q3 Ñ R by

ˆ

3ź

ηpN1, N2, N3q :“

ϕ

j“2

ˆ

1
10(cid:15)2
0

Nj
N1

´

|ξ0
j |
|ξ0
1|

˙˙

;

thus ηp|ξ1|, |ξ2|, |ξ3|q is only non-vanishing when ξ1, ξ2, ξ3 have comparable magnitude.

Note that ηpN1, N2, N3q “ ηp1, elogpN2{N1q, elogpN3{N1qq, and that px, yq ÞÑ ηp1, ex, eyq is a
smooth compactly supported function. By Fourier17 inversion, we thus have a represen-
tation of the form

ηpN1, N2, N3q “ ηp1, elogpN2{N1q, elogpN3{N1qq
ż

ż

“

“

R

ż

R
ż

R

R

eit2 logpN2{N1qeit3 logpN3{N1qφpt2, t3q dt2dt3

N ´it2´it3

1

N it2

2 N it3

3 φpt2, t3q dt2dt3

for any N1, N2, N3 ą 0, where φ : R2 Ñ C is a rapidly decreasing function, thus

ż

ż

|φpt2, t3q|p1 ` |t2| ` |t3|qk dt2dt3 ă 8

R

R

for all k ě 0. If we then deﬁne the bilinear operator Bη : H 10
H 10

df pR3q˚ b C via duality by the formula

df pR3q b C ˆ H 10

df pR3q b C Ñ

ż

ż

xBηpu, vq, wy :“

R

R

@

`

B

D´it2´it3u, Dit2v

˘

D

, Dit3w

φpt2, t3q dt2dt3

where Dit is the Fourier multiplier

zDitupξq :“ |ξ|it ˆupξq

then Bη is a complex average of B (note that }Dit}k grows polynomially in t for each
k). From (1.3) and Fubini’s theorem (working ﬁrst with Schwartz u, v, w to justify all

17One could also use Mellin inversion here if desired.

22

TERENCE TAO

the exchange of integrals, and then taking limits) we see that18

ż

xBηpu, vq, wy “ ´πi

ηp|ξ1|, |ξ2|, |ξ3|qΛξ1,ξ2,ξ3pˆupξ1q, ˆvpξ2q, ˆwpξ3qq.

ξ1`ξ2`ξ3“0

It thus suﬃces to show that C is a complex average of Bη.

ϕ

ˆ

˙

ÿ

ρpξ1q :“

Next, we localise the frequency ξ1 to the correct sequence of balls. Let ρ : R3 Ñ C be
the function
`

1
(cid:15)2
0
1, 2(cid:15)2
with ϕ deﬁned as before; thus ρ is supported on the union of the balls p1`(cid:15)0qn¨Bpξ0
0q
for n P Z. Let ρpDq be the associated Fourier multiplier; this is easily checked to be a
Fourier multiplier of order 0. By Deﬁnition 3.4, the bilinear operator Bη,ρ deﬁned by
Bη,ρpu, vq :“ BηpρpDqu, vq
is clearly a complex average of Bη, and so it suﬃces to show that C is a complex average
of Bη,ρ.

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´nξ1 ´ ξ0
1

nPZ

˘

3.4. Fourth step:
single scale. Observe that we can decompose Bη,ρ “ ´πi
each n P Z we may deﬁne the operator Bη,ρ,n : H 10
by the formula

localising to a single frequency scale. Now we localise to a
nPZp1`(cid:15)0q5n{2Bη,ρ,n, where for
df pR3qbC Ñ H 10
df pR3q˚bC
˙

df pR3qbCˆH 10
ˆ

ř

ż

˘

xBη,ρ,npu, vq, wy “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5n{2

ϕ

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´nξ1 ´ ξ0
1

ξ1`ξ2`ξ3“0
ηp|ξ1|, |ξ2|, |ξ3|qΛξ1,ξ2,ξ3pˆupξ1q, ˆvpξ2q, ˆwpξ3qq
df pR3q. In a similar vein, we may use (3.6) to decompose C “

ř

nPZp1 `

`

1
(cid:15)2
0

for u, v, w P H 10
(cid:15)0q5n{2Cn, where

xCnpu, vq, wy “ xu, ψ1,nyxv, ψ2,nyxw, ψ3,ny.
(3.9)
Observe (by using the change of variables ˜ξ :“ ξ{p1 ` (cid:15)0qn) that we have the scaling
laws

@

`

D

˘

xBη,ρ,npu, vq, wy “

Bη,ρ,0

Dilp1`(cid:15)0q´nu, Dilp1`(cid:15)0q´nv

, Dilp1`(cid:15)0q´nw

and similarly

@

`

for any n P Z and u, v, w P H 10

xCnpu, vq, wy “

Dilp1`(cid:15)0q´nu, Dilp1`(cid:15)0q´nv

C0
df pR3q b C.

˘

D

, Dilp1`(cid:15)0q´nw

Suppose for now that we can show that C0 is a complex average of Bη,ρ,0 (without the
use of dilation operators), thus
ż

˘

D

@

`

xC0pu, vq, wy “

Bη,ρ,0

m1,ωpDqRotR1,ω u, m2,ωpDqRotR2,ω v

, m3,ωpDqRotR3w

dµpωq

Ω

(3.10)
for some mj,ω, Rj (j “ 1, 2, 3), and pΩ, µq as in Deﬁnition 3.4. From the deﬁnition of C0
(and the support hypotheses on ψ1, ψ2, ψ3), we see that we may smoothly localise each

18Note that we do not deﬁne ηp|ξ1|, |ξ2|, |ξ3|q when one of ξ1, ξ2, ξ3 vanishes, but this is only occurs

on a set of measure zero and so there is no diﬃculty deﬁning the integral.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

23

mj,ω to the ball Bpξ0
0qq without loss of generality (and without destroying the fact
that the mi,ωpDq are Fourier multipliers of order 0 that obey (3.5)). If we then deﬁne

j , Op(cid:15)3

mi,ω,npξq :“ mi,ωpp1 ` (cid:15)0q´nξq

ř

and ˜mi,ω :“
(3.5), and the quantity

nPZ mi,ω,n, then the mi,ωpDq are also Fourier multipliers of order 0 obeying

ż

@

Ω

`

˘

D

Bη,ρ

m1,ω,n1pDqRotR1,ω u, m2,ω,n2pDqRotR2,ω v

, m3,ω,n3pDqRotR3w

dµpωq

is equal to ´πixCn1pu, vq, wy when n1 “ n2 “ n3, and vanishing otherwise if (cid:15)0 is small
enough (thanks to the support properties of mi,ω,n, η and ρ). Summing, we see that
D

@

ż

`

˘

Bη,ρ

˜m1,ωpDqRotR1,ω u, ˜m2,ωpDqRotR2,ω v

, ˜m3,ωpDqRotR3w

dµpωq

Ω

xCpu, vq, wy “

1
´πi

(as before, one can work ﬁrst with Schwartz u, v, w, and then take limits), thus demon-
1
´πi factor into
strating that C is a complex average of Bη,ρ as desired (absorbing the
m1,ω). Thus, to ﬁnish the proof of Theorem 3.2, it suﬃces to show that C0 is a complex
average of Bη,ρ,0.

3.5. Fifth step: extracting the symbol. We have reduced matters to the task of
obtaining a representation (3.10) for xC0pu, vq, wy. By (3.9) and Plancherel’s theorem,
we may expand xC0pu, vq, wy as
ż

ż

ż

´
upξ1q ¨ ˆψ1pξ1q

¯ ´

vpξ2q ¨ ˆψ2pξ2q

¯ ´

¯
wpξ3q ¨ ˆψ3pξ3q

dξ1dξ2dξ3

R3

R3

R3

which we rewrite as

ż

ż

ż

pupξ1q b vpξ2q b wpξ3qq ¨

R3

R3

R3

´
¯
ˆψ1pξ1q b ˆψ2pξ2q b ˆψ3pξ3q

dξ1dξ2dξ3

(3.11)

where ¨ here denotes the standard complex-bilinear inner product on the 33 “ 27-
dimensional complex vector space C3 b C3 b C3. Meanwhile, the right-hand side of
(3.10) can be expanded as

ż

ż

ξ1`ξ2`ξ3“0

`

Ω
Λξ1,ξ2,ξ3

m1,ωpξ1qm2,ωpξ2qm3,ωpξ3qϕ

ˆ

`

1
(cid:15)2
0
2,ωξ2q, R3,ω ˆwpR´1

ξ1 ´ ξ0
1

˘

˙

˘

ηp|ξ1|, |ξ2|, |ξ3|qˆ

ş
Rewriting the integral
R3 δpξ1 `
ξ2 ` ξ3q dξ1dξ2dξ3, where δ is the Dirac delta function on R3, and then applying the

R1,ω ˆupR´1
ş
ξ1`ξ2`ξ3“0 (by a slight abuse19 of notation) as

1,ωξ1q, R2,ω ˆvpR´1

dµpωq.

3,ωξ3q

ş
R3

ş
R3

19If one wanted to be more formally rigorous here, one could replace the Dirac delta function δpξq
ε q for some smooth compactly supported function

here with an approximation to the identity 1
φ : R3 Ñ R of total mass one, and then add a limit symbol limεÑ0 outside of the integration.

ε3 φp ξ

24

TERENCE TAO

change of variables ξj ÞÑ R´1

ż

ż

ż

ż

j,ωξj, we may rewrite the above expression as

δpR1,ωξ1 ` R2,ωξ2 ` R3,ωξ3qm1,ωpR1,ωξ1qm2,ωpR2,ωξ2qm3,ωpR3,ωξ3q

Ω

R3
`

R1,ωξ1 ´ ξ0
1

˙

˘

ηp|ξ1|, |ξ2|, |ξ3|qˆ

R3

ϕ

R3
ˆ
1
(cid:15)2
0

ΛR1,ωξ1,R2,ωξ2,R3,ωξ3pR1,ω ˆupξ1q, R2,ω ˆvpξ2q, R3,ω ˆwpξ3qq
dµpωqdξ1dξ2dξ3.

Comparing this with the expansion (3.11) of the left-hand side of (3.10), we claim
that our task is now reduced to that of constructing a ﬁnite measure space pΩ, µq and
measurable functions Ri,¨ : Ω Ñ SOp3q, mi,¨pDq : Ω Ñ M0bC, and F : Ω Ñ C3bC3bC3
obeying (3.5) with F bounded, such that we have the identity

ż

X1 b X2 b X3 “

δpR1,ωξ1 ` R2,ωξ2 ` R3,ωξ3qF pωqm1,ωpR1,ωξ1qm2,ωpR2,ωξ2qm3,ωpR3,ωξ3q

ˆ
Ω

ϕ

`

1
(cid:15)2
0

˙

˘

R1,ωξ1 ´ ξ0
1

ηp|ξ1|, |ξ2|, |ξ3|qˆ

ΛR1,ωξ1,R2,ωξ2,R3,ωξ3pR1,ωX1, R2,ωX2, R3,ωX3q dµpωq

(3.12)

j , (cid:15)3

0q and Xj P ξK

for all ξj P Bpξ0
Indeed, if one applies (3.12) with
j , j “ 1, 2, 3.
pX1, X2, X3q “ pˆupξ1q, ˆvpξ2q, ˆwpξ3qq, contracts the resulting tensor against ˆψ1pξ1q b
ˆψ2pξ2q b ˆψ3pξ3q and then integrates in ξ1, ξ2, ξ3 (absorbing the ˆψi and F factors into the
mj,ω terms, after ﬁrst breaking F into 27 components), we obtain the desired decompo-
sition (3.10) (after replacing Ω with the disjoint union of 27 copies of Ω to accommodate
the contributions from the various components of F ). As before, one may wish to ﬁrst
work with Schwartz u, v, w to justify the interchanges of integrals, and then take limits
at the end of the argument.

3.6. Sixth step: simplifying the weights. It remains to obtain the decomposition
(3.12). We will restrict attention to those rotations Rj,ω which almost ﬁx ξ0
j in the sense
that

for j “ 1, 2, 3. With this restriction, the weight ϕp 1
(cid:15)2
0
equal to one (for (cid:15)0 small enough), and so (3.12) simpliﬁes to

pR1,ωξ1 ´ ξ0

ż

|Rj,ωξ0

j ´ ξ0

j | ă (cid:15)2

0{2

(3.13)
1qqηp|ξ1|, |ξ2|, |ξ3|q is

X1 b X2 b X3 “

δpR1,ωξ1 ` R2,ωξ2 ` R3,ωξ3qF pωqm1,ωpR1,ωξ1qm2,ωpR2,ωξ2qm3,ωpR3,ωξ3qˆ

Ω

ΛR1,ωξ1,R2,ωξ2,R3,ωξ3pR1,ωX1, R2,ωX2, R3,ωX3q dµpωq.

(3.14)

Let

Σ Ă SOp3q ˆ SOp3q ˆ SOp3q ˆ R3 ˆ R3 ˆ R3

denote the set of sextuples pR1, R2, R3, ξ1, ξ2, ξ3q where Rj P SOp3q with |Rjξ0
0{4 for j “ 1, 2, 3, and ξi P Bpξ0
(cid:15)2

j ´ ξ0

j | ă

i , 2(cid:15)3
0q for i “ 1, 2, 3 with
R1ξ1 ` R2ξ2 ` R3ξ3 “ 0.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

25

For (cid:15)0 small enough, we see from the implicit function theorem that this is a smooth
manifold (of dimension 15), and that for any choice of ξj P Bpξ0
0q for j “ 1, 2, 3, the
slice

j , 2(cid:15)3

Σξ1,ξ2,ξ3 :“ tpR1, R2, R3q : pR1, R2, R3, ξ1, ξ2, ξ3q P Σu

is a smooth manifold (of dimension 6).

Suppose that we can ﬁnd a smooth function

F 1 : Σ Ñ C3 b C3 b C3

such that we have the identity

ż

X1 b X2 b X3 “

F 1pR1, R2, R3, ξ1, ξ2, ξ3qˆ

Σξ1,ξ2,ξ3

(3.15)

ΛR1ξ1,R2ξ2,R3ξ3pR1X1, R2X2, R3X3q dσpR1, R2, R3q

whenever ξj P Bpξ0
on Σξ1,ξ2,ξ3. By a change of variables, this can be rewritten as

0q and Xj P ξK

j , (cid:15)3

j , j “ 1, 2, 3, where dσpR1, R2, R3q is surface measure

ż

X1 b X2 b X3 “

δpR1ξ1 ` R2ξ2 ` R3ξ3q ˜F 1pR1, R2, R3, ξ1, ξ2, ξ3qˆ

U

ΛR1ξ1,R2ξ2,R3ξ3pR1X1, R2X2, R3X3q dR1dR2dR3

where ˜F 1 : Σ Ñ C3 b C3 b C3 is another smooth function (F 1 multiplied by some
Jacobian factors) and dR1, dR2, dR3 denote Haar measure on SOp3q, with

U :“ tpR1, R2, R3q P SOp3q3 : |Rjξ0

j ´ ξ0

j | ă (cid:15)2

0{4 for j “ 1, 2, 3u.

We may smoothly extend ˜F 1 to become a smooth compactly supported function on the
larger domain

U ˆ Bpξ0

1, 2(cid:15)3

0q ˆ Bpξ0

2, 2(cid:15)3

0q ˆ Bpξ0

3, 2(cid:15)3

0q.

By a Fourier expansion and another smooth truncation, we may thus write

˜F 1pR1, R2, R3, ξ1, ξ2, ξ3q “

ż

R3ˆR3ˆR3

f pR1, R2, R3, x1, x2, x3q

3ź

j“1

pe2πixj ¨ξj mjpξjqq dx1dx2dx3

j , 3(cid:15)3

j , (cid:15)3q, where mj is a smooth function supported
whenever pR1, R2, R3q P U and ξj P Bpξ0
0q, and f : U ˆ R3 ˆ R3 ˆ R3 Ñ C3 ˆ C3 ˆ C3 is rapidly decreasing in
on Bpξ0
x1, x2, x3, uniformly in R1, R2, R3. Inserting this expansion into (3.15), we obtain the
desired expansion (3.14) (taking Ω to be U ˆ R3 ˆ R3 ˆ R3, with µ being Haar measure
weighted by |f |, choosing the mj,ω to be an appropriately rotated version of mj, twisted
by a plane wave, and with F :“ f {|f |).

3.7. Seventh step: restricting to rotations around ﬁxed axes. It remains to ﬁnd
a smooth function F 1 for which one has the required representation (3.15). Observe
from (3.8) and the implicit function theorem (for (cid:15)0 small enough) that if ξj P Bpξ0
j , (cid:15)3
0q
for j “ 1, 2, 3, one can ﬁnd rotations Rj,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3 P SOp3q for j “ 1, 2, 3 with

Rj,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3 “ I ` Op(cid:15)3
0q

26

TERENCE TAO

(where I is the identity matrix) and the tuple p ˜ξ1, ˜ξ2, ˜ξ3q deﬁned by

˜ξj :“ Rj,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3ξj

lives in the space

Γ :“ tpη1, η2, η3q P Bpξ0

1, C(cid:15)3

0q ˆ Bpξ0

2, C(cid:15)3

0q ˆ Bpξ0

3, C(cid:15)3

0q : η1 ` η2 ` η3 “ 0u

(3.16)

(3.17)

for some absolute constant C independent of (cid:15)0. Furthermore, from the implicit function
theorem we may make Rj,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3 and hence ˜ξ1, ˜ξ2, ˜ξ3 depend smoothly on ξ1, ξ2, ξ3 in the
indicated domain if (cid:15)0 is small enough. If we let Rθ
ξ P SOp3q denote the rotation by θ
around the axis ξ using the right-hand rule20 for any ξ P R3zt0u and θ P R{2πZ, we
then see that the six-dimensional manifold

tpSRθ1
˜ξ1

R1,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3, SRθ2
˜ξ2

R2,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3, SRθ3
˜ξ3

R3,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3q : S P SOp3q; θ1, θ2, θ3 P R{2πZ; }S´I} ď (cid:15)2{8u

(3.18)
(where }} denotes the operator norm) is an open submanifold of Σξ1,ξ2,ξ3. Also, if we
use the ansatz

pR1, R2, R3q “ pSRθ1
˜ξ1

R1,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3, SRθ2
˜ξ2

R2,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3, SRθ3
˜ξ3

R3,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3q

then from (1.4) we see that

´

¯

ΛR1ξ1,R2ξ2,R3ξ3pR1X1, R2X2, R3X3q “ Λ ˜ξ1, ˜ξ2, ˜ξ3

Rθ1
˜ξ1

R1,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3X1, Rθ2
˜ξ2

R2,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3X2, Rθ2
˜ξ3

R2,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3X3

for Xj P ξK

j , j “ 1, 2, 3. Thus, if we can ﬁnd a smooth function

F 2 : R{2πZ ˆ R{2πZ ˆ R{2πZ ˆ Γ Ñ C3 b C3 b C3

with the property that

ż

Y1 b Y2 b Y3 “

F 2pθ1, θ2, θ3, η1, η2, η3qˆ

(3.19)

R{2πZˆR{2πZˆR{2πZ
η1Y1, Rθ2

Λη1,η2,η3pRθ1

η2Y2, Rθ3

η3Y3q dθ1dθ2dθ3

for all pη1, η2, η3q P Γ and Yj P ηK
j
and ηj “ ˜ξj, we have

for j “ 1, 2, 3, then by substituting Yj “ Rj,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3Xj

ż

R1,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3X1 b R2,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3X2 b R3,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3X3 “

R{2πZˆR{2πZˆR{2πZ

F 2pθ1, θ2, θ3, ˜ξ1, ˜ξ2, ˜ξ3qˆ

ΛR1ξ1,R2ξ2,R3ξ3pR1X1, R2X2, R3X3q dθ1dθ2dθ3

j , (cid:15)3q and Xj P ξK

for any ξj P Bpξ0
j . Averaging this over all S P SOp3q with }S´I} ď (cid:15)2{8,
and inverting the tensored rotation operator R1,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3 b R2,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3 b R3,ξ1,ξ2,ξ3, we obtain
a representation of the desired form (3.15). Thus it suﬃces to ﬁnd a smooth function
F 2 with the representation (3.19).

20More precisely, if u is the unit vector u “ ξ{|ξ|, we deﬁne Rθ

ξX :“ pX ¨ uqu ` cospθqpX ´ pX ¨

uquq ` sinpθqu ˆ X.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

27

3.8. Eighth step: parameterising in terms of rotation angles. Note that if
pη1, η2, η3q P Γ, then the vectors η1, η2, η3 are coplanar, and so we may ﬁnd a unit
vector n “ npη1, η2, η3q orthogonal to all of the ηi; by the implicit function theorem we
may ensure that n depends smoothly on η1, η2, η3. From (3.7) we may normalise n to
be close to p0, 0, 1q (as opposed to close to p0, 0, ´1q). To prove (3.19), it suﬃces by
homogeneity to consider the case when Y1, Y2, Y3 are unit vectors; as Yj P ηK
j , this means
that we may write Yj “ Rαj
ηj n for some αj P R{2πZ for all j “ 1, 2, 3. We may thus
rewrite (3.19) as the claim that
ż

Rα1

η1 n b Rα2

η2 n b Rα3

η3 n “

R{2πZˆR{2πZˆR{2πZ

F 2pθ1, θ2, θ3, η1, η2, η3qˆ

(3.20)

Θη1,η2,η3pθ1 ` α1, θ2 ` α2, θ3 ` α3q dθ1dθ2dθ3

for all pη1, η2, η3q P Γ and α1, α2, α3 P R{2πZ, where Θη1,η2,η3 : pR{2πZq3 Ñ R is the
function

Θη1,η2,η3pγ1, γ2, γ3q :“ Λη1,η2,η3pRγ1

(3.21)
Note that for ﬁxed η1, η2, η3 and each j “ 1, 2, 3, each of the three coeﬃcients of
Rαj
ηj n P R3 is a complex linear combination of e´iαj and eiαj , with coeﬃcients depending
smoothly on η1, η2, η3. Thus to show (3.20), it suﬃces to obtain a representation

η1 n, Rγ2

η2 n, Rγ3

η3 nq.

ż

eipσ1α1`σ2α2`σ3α3q “

R{2πZˆR{2πZˆR{2πZ

Fσ1,σ2,σ3pθ1, θ2, θ3, η1, η2, η3qˆ

(3.22)

Θη1,η2,η3pθ1 ` α1, θ2 ` α2, θ3 ` α3q dθ1dθ2dθ3

for all eight choices of sign patterns pσ1, σ2, σ3q P t´1, `1u3, and some smooth functions
Fσ1,σ2,σ3 : R{2πZ ˆ R{2πZ ˆ R{2πZ ˆ Γ Ñ C.

3.9. Ninth step: Fourier inversion and checking a non-degeneracy condition.
By (3.21), (1.4) and decomposing Rγj
ηj n into a complex linear combination of e´iγj and
eiγj , we see that for ﬁxed η1, η2, η3, we may expand

Θη1,η2,η3pγ1, γ2, γ3q “

pσ1,σ2,σ3qPt´1,`1u3

ÿ

cσ1,σ2,σ3pη1, η2, η3qeipσ1γ1`σ2γ2`σ3γ3q

(3.23)

for some smooth coeﬃcients cσ1,σ2,σ3 : Γ Ñ C. From the Fourier inversion formula on
pR{2πZq3, we thus obtain (3.22) as long as we have the non-degeneracy condition

cσ1,σ2,σ3pη1, η2, η3q ‰ 0

(3.24)

for all pη1, η2, η3q P Γ and all choices of signs pσ1, σ2, σ3q P t´1, `1u3.

For this, we ﬁnally need to use the precise form of Λ. From (3.21), (1.4) we can write
Θη1,η2,η3pγ1, γ2, γ3q as

pRγ1

η1 n ¨ η2qpRγ2

η2 n ¨ Rγ3

η3 nq ` pRγ2

η2 n ¨ η1qpRγ1

η1 n ¨ Rγ3

η3 nq

which we expand further as

sinpγ1q ppu1 ˆ nq ¨ η2q pcospγ2q cospγ3q ` pu2 ¨ u3q sinpγ2q sinpγ3qq

` sinpγ2q ppu2 ˆ nq ¨ η1q pcospγ1q cospγ3q ` pu1 ¨ u3q sinpγ1q sinpγ3qq

28

TERENCE TAO

where ui :“ ηi{|ηi|. Expanding

and

we have

and

sinpγq “

1
2i

peiγ ´ e´iγq “

cospγq “

1
2

peiγ ` e´iγq “

1
2i

1
2

ÿ

σ“˘1

ÿ

σ“˘1

σeiσγ

eiσγ

cospγ2q cospγ3q “

1
4

ÿ

σ2,σ3“˘1

eipσ2γ2`σ3γ3q

sinpγ2q sinpγ3q “ ´

1
4

ÿ

σ2,σ3“˘1

σ2σ3eipσ2γ2`σ3γ3q

(3.25)

(the minus sign arising here from the i in the denominator in (3.25)). Similarly with
σ2, γ2 replaced by σ1, γ1 respectively. Inserting these expansions and comparing with
(3.23), we conclude that

cσ1,σ2,σ3pη1, η2, η3q “

1
8i
j ` Op(cid:15)3
But by (3.17), ηj “ ξ0

0q, which from (3.7) implies that

pppu1 ˆ nq ¨ η2q σ1 p1 ´ pu2 ¨ u3q σ2σ3q ` ppu2 ˆ nq ¨ η1q σ2 p1 ´ pu1 ¨ u3q σ1σ3qq .

pu1 ¨ nq ¨ η2 “ ´1 ` Op(cid:15)0q

pu2 ¨ nq ¨ η1 “

` Op(cid:15)0q

1
?
2
1
?
2
u1 ¨ u3 “ Op(cid:15)0q

u2 ¨ u3 “ ´

` Op(cid:15)0q

and thus

cσ1,σ2,σ3pη1, η2, η3q “ ´

1
8i

p´σ1 `

1
?
2

σ2 `

1
?
2

σ1σ2σ3q ` Op(cid:15)0q.

σ2 ` 1?
2

As ´σ1 ` 1?
σ1σ2σ3 is bounded away from zero for σ1, σ2, σ3 P t´1, `1u, the
2
non-degeneracy claim (3.24) follows for (cid:15)0 small enough. This concludes the proof of
Theorem 3.2.

1, ξ0

Remark 3.5. The averaging over dilation operators was only needed to place the base
frequencies ξ0
2, ξ0
3 in a location where the non-degeneracy condition (3.24) held. This
condition in fact holds for generic ξ0
3, and so even without the use of averaging
over dilations it should be the case that most local cascade operators are expressible as
averaged Euler operators. As there is some freedom to select the local cascade operators
in Theorem 3.3, this should still be enough to establish a slightly stronger version of
Theorem 1.5 in which one does not use any averaging over dilations. We will however
not pursue this matter here.

2, ξ0

1, ξ0

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

29

4. Reduction to an infinite-dimensional ODE

We now begin the proof of Theorem 3.3. We ﬁx 0 ă (cid:15)0 ă 1; henceforth we allow
all implied constants in the Opq notation to depend on (cid:15)0. We suppose that Theorem
3.3 failed, so that one can always construct21 global mild solutions to any initial value
problem of the form (3.3) with C a local cascade operator and u0 a Schwartz divergence-
free vector ﬁeld.

To apply this hypothesis, we need to construct a local cascade operator C and an initial
velocity ﬁeld u0. We need a dimension parameter m, which will be a positive integer
(eventually we will set m “ 4). Let B1, . . . , Bm be balls in the annulus tξ P R3 : 1 ă
|ξ| ď 1 ` (cid:15)0{2u, chosen so that the 2m balls B1, . . . , Bm, ´B1, . . . , ´Bm are all disjoint.
df pR3q be Schwartz with Fourier transform real-valued
For each i “ 1, . . . , m, let ψi P H 10
and supported22 on Bi Y ´Bi, normalised so that }ψi}L2pR3q “ 1.

As in Deﬁnition 3.1, we deﬁne the rescaled functions

ψi,npxq :“ p1 ` (cid:15)0q3n{2ψi pp1 ` (cid:15)0qnxq

for i “ 1, . . . , m and n P Z, and then deﬁne the local cascade operator C by the formula

ÿ

ÿ

Cpu, vq :“

pi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3qPt1,...,mu3ˆS

nPZ
αi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3p1 ` (cid:15)0q5n{2xu, ψi1,n`µ1yxv, ψi2,n`µ2yψi3,n`µ3

(4.1)

for u, v P H 10

df pR3q, where S Ă Z3 is the four-element set

S :“ tp0, 0, 0q, p1, 0, 0q, p0, 1, 0q, p0, 0, 1qu,

the αi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3 P R are structure constants to be chosen later, and which obey the
symmetry condition

αi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3 “ αi2,i1,i3,µ2,µ1,µ3

(4.2)

for pi1, i2, i3, µ1, µ2, µ3q P S. From Deﬁnition 3.1 we see that C is indeed a local cascade
operator (it is a sum of |S| “ 7m3 basic local cascade operators), and (4.2) ensures that
C is symmetric. Clearly
ÿ

ÿ

xCpu, uq, uy “

pi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3qPt1,...,mu3ˆS

nPZ
αi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3p1 ` (cid:15)0q5n{2xu, ψi1,n`µ1yxu, ψi2,n`µ2yxu, ψi3,n`µ3y

21This hypothesis of global existence is technically convenient so that we may assume some a priori
regularity on our solution, namely H 10. Alternatively, one could develop an H 10 local well-posedness
theory for (3.3), and unconditionally construct a mild H 10 solution that blows up in a ﬁnite time by a
minor modiﬁcation of the arguments in this paper; we leave the details of this variant of the argument
to the interested reader.

22We need to have ˆψi supported on Bi Y ´Bi rather than just Bi, otherwise we could not require

ψi to be real.

30

TERENCE TAO

for u P H 10
the cancellation conditions

df pR3q. From this, we see that the cancellation condition (3.2) will follow from

ÿ

ta,b,cu“t1,2,3u

αia,ib,ic,µa,µb,µc “ 0

(4.3)

for all i1, i2, i3 P t1, . . . , mu and pµ1, µ2, µ3q P S.

We will select initial data u0 of the form23

u0 :“ ψ1,n0
(4.4)
for some suﬃciently large24 integer n0 to be chosen later. This is clearly a Schwarz
divergence-free vector ﬁeld. By hypothesis, we thus have a global mild solution u :
df pR3q to the system (3.3). We record some basic properties of this solution
r0, `8q Ñ H 10
here:

Lemma 4.1 (Equations of motion). Let C be a cascade operator of the form (4.1), with
coeﬃcients αi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3 obeying the symmetry (4.2) and cancellation property (4.3).
df pR3q be a global mild solution to the equation (3.3) with initial
Let u : r0, `8q Ñ H 10
data given by (4.4) for some n0. For each n P Z, t ě 0 and i “ 1, . . . , m, let ui,nptq be
the Fourier projection of uptq to the region p1 ` (cid:15)0qn ¨ pBi Y ´Biq, thus

{
ui,nptqpξq “

y
uptqpξq1ξPp1`(cid:15)0qn¨pBiY´Biq

and then deﬁne the coeﬃcients

and the local energies

Xi,nptq :“ xuptq, ψi,ny “ xui,nptq, ψi,ny

Ei,nptq :“

1
2

}ui,nptq}2

L2pR3q.

(i) (A priori regularity) We have

sup
0ďtďT

sup
nPZ

sup
i“1,...,m

p1 ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q10nq|Xi,nptq| ă 8

and

sup
0ďtďT
for all 0 ă T ă 8.

sup
nPZ

sup
i“1,...,m

p1 ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q10nqEi,nptq1{2 ă 8

(ii) (Initial conditions) For any n P Z and i “ 1, . . . , m, we have

Ei,np0q “

1
2

Xi,np0q2

(4.5)

(4.6)

(4.7)

(4.8)

23Our analysis is in fact somewhat stable, and will also apply if u0 is a suﬃciently small perturbation
of ψ1,n0 in the H 10
df norm, thus creating blowup for a non-empty open set of initial data in smooth
topologies, although this open set is rather small and is also quite far from the origin (due to the large
nature of n0). We leave the details of this modiﬁcation to the interested reader.

24Alternatively (and equivalently), one could hold n0 ﬁxed (e.g. n0 “ 0), and rescale the viscosity ν
to be small, thus one is now studying the equation Btu “ ν∆u ` Cpu, uq with some small ν ą 0. One
can then repeat all the arguments below, basically with ν playing the role of the quantity p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2
that will make a prominent appearance in later sections. We leave the details of this variant of the
argument to the interested reader.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

31

and

(4.9)
Xi,np0q “ 1pi,nq“p1,n0q.
(iii) (Equations of motion) For any n P Z and i “ 1, . . . , m, we have the equation of

motion
ÿ

ÿ

BtXi,n “

i1,i2Pt1,...,mu

pµ1,µ2,µ3qPS

αi1,i2,i,µ1,µ2,µ3p1`(cid:15)0q5pn´µ3q{2Xi1,n´µ3`µ1Xi2,n´µ3`µ2`O

´
p1 ` (cid:15)0q2nE1{2
i,n

¯

.

(4.10)

and the energy inequality

ÿ

ÿ

BtEi,n ď

i1,i2Pt1,...,mu

pµ1,µ2,µ3qPS

αi1,i2,i,µ1,µ2,µ3p1 ` (cid:15)0q5pn´µ3q{2Xi1,n´µ3`µ1Xi2,n´µ3`µ2Xi,n

for all t ě 0.

(iv) (Energy defect) For any n P Z and i “ 1, . . . , m, we have

1
2

X 2

i,nptq ď Ei,nptq ď

1
2

X 2

i,nptq ` O

p1 ` (cid:15)0q2n

ˆ

ż

0

t

Ei,npt1q dt1

for all t ě 0.

(v) (No very low frequencies) One has

Xi,nptq “ Ei,nptq “ 0

for all n ă n0, i “ 1, . . . , m, and t ě 0.

˙

(4.11)

(4.12)

(4.13)

Proof. As u is a mild solution to (3.3), we have

ż

t

uptq “ et∆u0 `

0

ept´t1q∆Cpupt1q, upt1qq dt1

(4.14)

Ť

for all t ě 0. Taking Fourier transforms, we see in particular that ˆuptq is supported on
µ“˘1 µp1 ` (cid:15)0qn ¨ Bi of dilations of the balls ˘B1, . . . , ˘Bm. As
the union
these dilated balls are disjoint, we thus have a decomposition

m
i“1

nPZ

Ť

Ť

ÿ

mÿ

uptq “

ui,nptq

nPZ

i“1

(which is unconditionally convergent in H 10). If we deﬁne the scalar functions Xi,n :
r0, `8q Ñ C by the formula

Xi,nptq :“ xuptq, ψi,ny “ xui,nptq, ψi,ny,

then from the a priori regularity u P C 0
Taking inner products of (4.14) with ψi,n, we have

t H 10

ÿ

ÿ

ui,nptq “ et∆Xi,np0qψi,n `

x we obtain (4.6) from the Plancherel identity.

i1,i2Pt1,...,mu

pµ1,µ2,µ3qPS
t

ż

αi1,i2,i,µ1,µ2,µ3p1 ` (cid:15)0q5pn´µ3q{2

0

Xi1,n´µ3`µ1pt1qXi2,n´µ3`µ2pt1qept´t1q∆ψi,n dt1

32

TERENCE TAO

or in diﬀerentiated form (using (4.6) to justify the calculations)
ÿ

ÿ

Btui,n “ ∆ui,n`

i1,i2Pt1,...,mu

pµ1,µ2,µ3qPS

αi1,i2,i,µ1,µ2,µ3p1`(cid:15)0q5pn´µ3q{2Xi1,n´µ3`µ1Xi2,n´µ3`µ2ψi,n.

In particular this shows that ui,n is continuously diﬀerentiable in time (in the L2
ogy, say), which implies that the Xi,n are continously diﬀerentiable.

(4.15)
x topol-

It is unfortunate that the ψi,n are not eigenfunctions of the Laplacian ∆, otherwise ui,n
would be always be a scalar multiple of ψi,n (that is, ui,n “ Xi,nψi,n), and the equation
(3.3) would collapse to a system of ODE in the Xi,n variables. However, it is still
possible to get good control on the dynamics even without the eigenfunction property.
To do this, we use the local energies Ei,n from (4.5). From Cauchy-Schwarz we have

Xi,nptq2 ď Ei,nptq,

(4.16)

1
2
t H 10

and from Plancherel and the C 0

x bound on u we have (4.7) for all 0 ă T ă 8.

By taking inner products of (4.15) with ui,n, and noting that

x∆ui,n, ui,ny ď 0

we obtain the local energy inequality (4.11). Indeed, one could use Fourier analysis to
place an additional dissipation term of 8π2p1`(cid:15)0q2nEi,n on the right-hand side of (4.11),
but we will not need to use this term here (it is too small to be of much use, since we
are in the regime where dissipation can be treated as a negligible perturbation).

If instead, if we take inner products of (4.15) with ψi,n, and note that

x∆ui,n, ψi,ny “ xui,n, ∆ψi,ny

¯

i,n }∆ψi,n}2

´
E1{2
´
p1 ` (cid:15)0q2nE1{2
i,n

L2pR3q
¯

“ O

“ O

we conclude (4.10).

From (4.10), (4.11) we see that

ˆ

Bt

Ei,n ´

˙

X 2
i,n

ď O

1
2

`

p1 ` (cid:15)0q2nEi,n

˘

while from (4.8) we see that Ei,n ´ 1
follows from (4.16) and the fundamental theorem of calculus.

2X 2

i,n vanishes at time zero. The claim (4.12) then

Finally, we prove (4.13). For i3 “ 1, . . . , m and n ă n0, we see from (4.11), (4.8), (4.9)
and the fundamental theorem of calculus that

ÿ

ÿ

Ei3,nptq ď

i1,i2Pt1,...,mu

pµ1,µ2,µ3qPS

0

αi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3p1`(cid:15)0q5pn´µ3q{2

Xi1,n´µ3`µ1Xi2,n´µ3`µ2Xi3,npt1q dt1

ż

t

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

33

for any t ě 0. Summing this for i “ 1, . . . , m and n ă n0, and using (4.6), (4.7) to
ensure all summations and integrals are absolutely convergent, we conclude that

ÿ

mÿ

ÿ

ÿ

ÿ

Ei,nptq ď

năn0

i“1

i1,i2,i3Pt1,...,mu

pµ1,µ2,µ3qPS

năn0

αi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3p1 ` (cid:15)0q5pn´µ3q{2

ż

t

0

Xi1,n´µ3`µ1Xi2,n´µ3`µ2Xi3,npt1q dt1.

By (4.3), all the terms here can be grouped into terms that sum to zero, except for
those terms with n “ n0 ´ 1, pµ1, µ2, µ3q P tp1, 0, 0q, p0, 1, 0qu; thus

ÿ

mÿ

năn0

i“1

Ei,nptq ď

ÿ

ÿ

αi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3p1 ` (cid:15)0q5pn0´1´µ3q{2

i1,i2,i3Pt1,...,mu
ż

t

pµ1,µ2,µ3qPtp1,0,0q,p0,1,0qu

Xi1,n0´1´µ3`µ1Xi2,n0´1´µ3`µ2Xi3,n0´1pt1q dt1.

0

By the constraint on pµ1, µ2, µ3q, two of the terms Xi1,n0´1´µ3`µ1, Xi2,n0´1´µ3`µ2, Xi3,n0´1
m
i“1 Ei,n, and the remaining term may be controlled by (4.6),
may be bounded by
leading to the bound

năn0

ř

ř

ÿ

mÿ

năn0

i“1

ż

t1

ÿ

mÿ

Ei,nptq ď CT,n0

Ei,npt1q dt1

0

năn0

i“1

for all 0 ď t ď T and some ﬁnite quantity CT,n0 depending on T, n0 (and on the
m
i“1 Ei,nptq “ 0
quantity in (4.6)). By Gronwall’s inequality, we conclude that
(cid:3)
for all t ě 0, giving (4.13).

năn0

ř

ř

The above lemma shows that (3.3) almost collapses into an ODE system for the Xi,n.
As a ﬁrst approximation, the reader may wish to ignore the role of the energies Ei,n
(or identify them with 1
i,n), and pretend that (4.10) is replaced by either the inviscid
equation

2X 2
ÿ

αi1,i2,i,µ1,µ2,µ3p1`(cid:15)0q5pn´µ3q{2Xi1,n´µ3`µ1Xi2,n´µ3`µ2 (4.17)

ÿ

BtXi,n “

i1,i2Pt1,...,mu

pµ1,µ2,µ3qPS

or the viscous equation
BtXi,n “ ´p1`(cid:15)0q2nXi,n`

ÿ

ÿ

i1,i2Pt1,...,mu

pµ1,µ2,µ3qPS

αi1,i2,i,µ1,µ2,µ3p1`(cid:15)0q5pn´µ3q{2Xi1,n´µ3`µ1Xi2,n´µ3`µ2

(4.18)
in the analysis that follows. Note that the viscous equation generalises the dyadic Katz-
Pavlovic equation (1.17) (with λ “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2 and α “ 2{5), which corresponds to a
simple case in which m “ 1.

Theorem 3.3 now follows from the following ODE result:

Theorem 4.2 (ODE blowup). Let 0 ă (cid:15)0 ă 1. Then there exist a natural number
m ě 0, structure constants αi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3 P R for i1, i2, i3 P t1, . . . , mu and pµ1, µ2, µ3q P
S obeying the symmetry condition (4.2) and the cancellation condition (4.3), with
the property that for suﬃciently large n0 (suﬃciently large depending on implied con-
stants in (4.11), (4.10)), there does not exist continuously diﬀerentiable functions Xi,n :

34

TERENCE TAO

r0, `8q Ñ R and Ei,n : r0, `8q Ñ r0, `8q obeying the conclusions (4.6)-(4.13) of
Lemma 4.1.

We will prove Theorem 4.2 in Section 6, but we ﬁrst warm up with some ﬁnite dimen-
sional ODE toy problems in the next section.

Remark 4.3 (Helicity conservation). As is well known (see e.g.
Euler equations Btu “ Bpu, uq conserve helicity
additional cancellation law

[32]), the inviscid
ş
R3 u ¨ pcurl uq. This is equivalent to the

for all u P H 10

xBpu, uq, curl uy “ 0

(4.19)
df pR3q. One can ask whether we can similarly enforce the cancellation law
(4.20)

x ˜Bpu, uq, curl uy “ 0

for the averaged operators ˜B.
In general, the operator C deﬁned in (4.1) will not
obey (4.20). However, we may still ensure (4.20) (while preserving the other desired
properties of ˜B) as follows. Firstly, observe that we may choose the functions ψ1, ψ2, ψ3
in the construction of C to be odd, thus ψip´xq “ ´ψipxq for all i “ 1, 2, 3 and x P R3.
Next, from (4.1), (4.3), and (4.2), we see that the operator Cpu, vq in (4.1) is a ﬁnite
linear combination of operators of the form

1
2

ÿ

p1 ` (cid:15)0q5n{2pAnpu, vq ` Anpv, uqq,

nPZ

where

n yψ2
n

nyψ3

nyxv, ψ2

nyxv, ψ3

n ´ xu, ψ1

Anpu, vq :“ xu, ψ1
df pR3q are odd functions with Fourier transform supported on an
and ψ1, ψ2, ψ3 P H 10
annulus. These operators obey the energy cancellation law xAnpu, uq, uy “ 0, but do
not necessarily obey the helicity cancellation law xAnpu, uq, curl uy “ 0. However, if we
introduce the modiﬁed operator
˜Anpu, vq :“ xu, ψ1
nyxv, ψ2
´ xu, ψ1
nyxv, curl ψ3
´ xu, curl´1 ψ2

n ` xu, curl´1 ψ2
n ` xu, ψ3

n y curl´1 ψ2
nyψ3

n yψ1
n
ny curl´1 ψ2

nyxv, curl ψ3

n yxv, curl ψ1

nyxv, curl ψ1

n ´ xu, ψ1

nyxv, ψ3

nyψ3

n yψ2
n

n

where curl´1 :“ ∆´1 curl inverts the curl operator on divergence free functions with
Fourier support on an annulus, one can check that ˜An obeys both the energy cancellation
x ˜Anpu, uq, uy and the helicity cancellation x ˜Anpu, uq, curl uy “ 0. Thus if we deﬁne ˜C by
replacing all occurrences of An with their counterparts ˜An, then ˜C also obeys energy and
helicity cancellation. Furthermore, observe that ˜Anpu, uq “ Anpu, uq is an odd function
whenever u is an odd function (basically because the curl or inverse curl of an odd
function is even, and thus orthogonal to all odd functions), and so ˜Cpu, uq “ Cpu, uq
when u is an odd function. It is then easy to see that any mild solution to Btu “ ˜Cpu, uq
with odd initial data is then odd for all time, and thus also solves Btu “ Cpu, uq. From
this, we see that Theorem 3.3 for C implies Theorem 3.3 for ˜C. As a consequence, we
can enforce helicity conservation in Theorem 1.5 if desired. Of course, it was unlikely
in any event that global helicity conservation would have been useful for the global
regularity problem, given that the helicity of an odd vector ﬁeld is automatically zero,

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

35

and that odd vector ﬁelds are preserved by the Euler and Navier-Stokes ﬂows, and are
not expected to be any more diﬃcult25 to handle than general vector ﬁelds.

ş
R3 u dx, total angular momentum

Finally, we remark that the Euler equations Btu “ Bpu, uq formally conserve total
ş
momentum
R3 ∇ ˆ
u dx. These quantities are also formally conserved by the equation Btu “ Cpu, uq for
any local cascade operator C, basically because the wavelets ψ1, ψ2, ψ3 used in building
these cascade operators have Fourier transform vanishing near the origin; we omit the
details.

ş
R3 x ˆ u dx, and total vorticity

5. Quadratic circuits

Our objective is to solve an inﬁnite-dimensional system of ODE, roughly of the form
(4.17). In order to build up some intuition for doing so, we will ﬁrst study a ﬁnite-
dimensional “toy” model, namely ODEs of the form

(5.1)
BtX “ GpX, Xq
where X : rt1, t2s Ñ Rm is a vector-valued trajectory for some ﬁnite m, and G :
Rm ˆ Rm Ñ Rm is a bilinear operator obeying the cancellation condition

(5.2)
GpX, Xq ¨ X “ 0
for all X P Rm (so in particular, the ﬂow (5.1) preserves the norm of X, and so the ODE
is globally well posed). It will be important for us that there is no size restriction on the
coeﬃcients on the bilinear operator G, although the coeﬃcients must of course be real.
The terminology “circuit” is meant to invoke an analogy with electrical engineering (and
also with computational complexity theory). Clearly, (5.1) is a toy model for the system
(4.17), and can also be viewed as a toy model for the Euler equations Btu “ Bpu, uq.
We will build a quadratic circuit to accomplish a speciﬁc task (namely, to abruptly
transfer energy from one mode to another, after a delay) out of “quadratic logic gates”,
by which we mean quadratic circuits (5.1) of a very small size (with m “ 2 or m “ 3)
and a simple structure to G, which each accomplish a single simple task of transforming
a certain type of input into a certain type of output.

We ﬁrst discuss in turn the three quadratic logic gates we will be using, which we call
the “pump”, the “ampliﬁer”, and the “rotor”, and then show how these gates can be
combined to build a circuit with the desired properties. It looks likely that the set of
quadratic gates is suﬃciently “Turing complete” in that they can perform extremely
general computational tasks26, but we will not pursue27 this matter further here.

25Indeed, any non-odd initial data for such ﬂows may be made odd by ﬁrst translating by a large
displacement and then anti-symmetrising, which will asymptotically have no impact on the dynamics
after renormalising.

26Of course, this is bearing in mind that, being globally well-posed ODE, circuits of the form (5.1)
are necessarily limited to perform continuous (i.e. analog) operations rather than perfectly digital
operations. Also, as the equation (5.1) is time reversible, only reversible computing tasks may be
performed by quadratic circuits, at least in the absence of dissipation.

27See [37] for a treatment of continuous computation in PDE, and [19] for continuous computation

in ODE.

36

TERENCE TAO

Figure 2. The pump gate from the x mode to the y mode with coupling
constant α.

Strictly speaking, the discussion here is not actually needed for the proof of our main
results, but we believe that the model problems studied here will assist the reader in
understanding what may otherwise be a highly unmotivated construction and set of
arguments in the next section.

5.1. The pump gate. We ﬁrst describe the pump gate. This is a binary gate (so
m “ 2), with unknown Xptq “ pxptq, yptqq P R2 obeying the quadratic ODE

Btx “ ´αxy
Bty “ αx2

(5.3)

where α ą 0 is a ﬁxed coupling constant (representing the strength of the pump). We
will be applying this pump in the regime where x is initially positive and y ě 0; by
Gronwall’s inequality (or by integrating factors), we see that x remains positive for all
subsequent time, while y is increasing. As the total energy x2 ` y2 is conserved, we thus
see that energy is being pumped from x to y. For instance, we have the explicit solution

xptq “ A sechpαAtq;

yptq “ A tanhpαAtq

(5.4)

for any amplitude A ą 0, which at time t “ 0 is at the initial state pxp0q, yp0qq “
pA, 0q. For times 0 ď t ď 1
αA , the y component increases more or less linearly at rate
comparable to αA2, with a corresponding drain of energy from x; after this time, x
decays exponentially fast (at rate αA), with the energy in x being transferred more or
less completely to y after time t ě C
αA for a large constant C. Thus, the pump can be
used to execute a delayed, but gradual, transition of energy from one mode (the x mode)
to another (the y mode). We will schematically depict the pump by a thick arrow: see
Figure 2.

If one ignores the dissipation term, the dyadic model equation (1.17) can be viewed as
a sequence of pumps chained together, with the coupling constant λn of the pump from
one mode Xn to the next Xn`1 increasing exponentially with n.

One useful feature of the pump which we will exploit is that it can “integrate” an
alternating input x into a monotone output y, somewhat analogously to how a rectiﬁer
in electrical engineering converts AC current to DC current. Indeed, if one couples the
x input of the pump to an external forcing term, thus

Btx “ ´αxy ` F
Bty “ αx2

with F highly oscillatory, then x may oscillate in sign also (if the F term dominates
the energy drain term ´αxy), but the y output continues to increase at a more or less
steady rate. If for instance F ptq “ Aω cospωtq with some quantities A, ω which are large

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

37

compared to the coupling constant α, and we set initial conditions xp0q “ yp0q “ 0 for
simplicity, then we expect x to behave like A sinpωtq, and y to increase at rate about
1
2αA2 on average.

If instead we couple the pump to an oscillatory forcing term on the output, thus

Btx “ ´αxy
Bty “ αx2 ` G

then it is possible that y can turn negative, which causes the pump to reverse in energy
ﬂow to become an ampliﬁer (see below). This behaviour will be undesirable for us,
so we will take some care to design our circuit so that the output of a pump does not
experience signiﬁcant negative forcing at key epochs in the dynamics, unless this forcing
is counterbalanced by an almost equivalent amount of positive forcing.

5.2. Application: ﬁnite time blowup for an exogenously truncated dyadic
model. As a quick application of the pump gate, we establish blowup for the trun-
cated version (1.21) of the dyadic model system (1.17), whenever one has supercritical
dissipation:

Proposition 5.1 (Blowup for a truncated dyadic model). Let λ ą 1 and 0 ă α ă 1{2,
and let 0 ă δ ă 1 ´ 2α. Then there exists a natural number n0, a sequence of times

0 “ tn0 ă tn0`1 ă tn0`2 ă . . .

increasing to a ﬁnite limit T˚, and continuous, piecewise smooth functions Xn : r0, T˚q Ñ
R for n ě n0 such that Xn0`kptq “ 0 whenever k ě 1 and 0 ď t ď tn0`k´1, and such
that

BtXn “ ´λ2nαXn ` 1ptn´1,tnqptqλn´1X 2

(5.5)
for all t P r0, T˚q other than the times tn0, tn1, . . ., and all n ě n0, with the convention
that tn0´1 “ 0 and Xn0´1 “ 0. Furthermore, we have
Xn0`kptn0`kq “ λ´δk

n´1 ´ 1ptn,tn`1qptqλnXnXn`1

for every k ě 0. In particular, for any δ1 ą δ, we have the blowup

lim sup
tÑT˚

sup
n

λδ1n|Xnptq| “ `8.

This proposition is not needed for the blowup results in the rest of the paper, but
is easier to prove than those results, and already illustrates the basic features of the
blowup solutions being constructed. Note that the blowup here is available for all values
of the dissipation parameter up to the critical value of 1{2, in contrast to the results
in [26] and [10] for the untruncated equation (1.17) which cover the ranges α ă 1{4
and α ă 1{3 respectively, as well as the results in [4] establishing global solutions when
λ “ 2 and 2{5 ď α ď 1{2.

Proof. We let n0 be a suﬃciently large natural number (depending on λ, α, δ) to be
chosen later. We then construct tn0, tn0`1, . . . and Xnptq iteratively as follows:

38

TERENCE TAO

Step 1. Initialise k “ 0 and tn0 “ 0. We also initialise

Xn0p0q “ 1; Xn0`kp0q “ 0 for all k ě 1.
Step 2. Now suppose that tn0`k has been constructed, and the solution Xnptq constructed
for all times 0 ď t ď tn0`k and n ě n0. We then solve the pump system with
dissipation

BtXn0`k “ ´λ2pn0`kqαXn0`k ´ λn0`kXn0`kXn0`k`1

BtXn0`k`1 “ ´λ2pn0`k`1qαXn0`k`1 ` λn0`kX 2

n0`k

(5.6)

(5.7)

within the time interval t P rtn0`k, tn0`k`1s, where tn0`k`1 is the ﬁrst time for
which Xn0`k`1ptn0`k`1q “ λ´δpk`1q; we justify the existence of such a time below.
Step 3. For each n ‰ n0 ` k, n0 ` k ` 1, we evolve Xn on rtn0`k, tn0`k`1s by the linear

ODE

Step 4. Increment k to k ` 1 and return to Step 2.

BtXn “ ´λ2nαXn.

Let us now establish that the time tn0`k`1 introduced in Step 2 is well deﬁned for any
given k ě 0. If we make the change of variables

xptq :“ λδkXn0`kptn0`k ` λ´n0´k`δktq
yptq :“ λδkXn0`k`1ptn0`k ` λ´n0´k`δktq

then we see from construction that we have the initial conditions

and the evolution equations

xp0q “ 1, yp0q “ 0

Btx “ ´εx ´ xy
Bty “ ´λ´2αεy ` x2

(5.8)

(5.9)

where

ε :“ λ´p1´2αqn0´p1´2α´δqk,
and our task is to show that yptq “ λ´δ for some ﬁnite t ą 0. However, from the
explicit solution (5.4) to the pump gate (5.3), we see that in the case ε “ 0, this occurs
at time t “ tanh´1pλ´δq; standard perturbation arguments then show that if n0 is
suﬃciently large (which forces ε to be suﬃciently small), the claim occurs at some time
t ď 2 tanh´1pλ´δq (say). Undoing the scaling, we see that

tn0`k`1 ´ tn0`k ď 2 tanh´1pλ´δqλ´n0´k`δk

so tn converges to a ﬁnite limit T˚ as n Ñ 8, and the claim follows.

(cid:3)

As mentioned in the introduction, one can use (a slight modiﬁcation of) this proposition
to obtain a weaker “exogenous” version of Theorem 1.5 in which the averaged operator
˜B “ ˜Bptq is now allowed to depend on the time coordinate t (in a piecewise constant
fashion, with an unbounded number of discontinuities as t approaches the blowup time).
We leave the details (which are an adaptation of those in Section 3) to the interested
reader.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

39

Remark 5.2. One cannot take δ “ 0 in the above argument, because the pump gate
never quite transfers all of its energy from the x mode to the y mode. If however we
worked with the modiﬁed equation

BtXn “ ´

λn
gpλnq2 Xn ` 1ptn´1,tnqptqλn´1pX 2

n´1 ` Xn´1Xnq ´ 1ptn,tn`1qptqλnpXnXn`1 ` X 2

n`1q

for some function g : r0, `8q Ñ r0, `8q increasing to inﬁnity, and deﬁnes tn0`k`1 to be
the ﬁrst time for which Xn0`kptn0`k`1q “ 0 (so that Xn0`k`1 is the only non-zero mode
at this time), then a modiﬁcation of the above argument establishes ﬁnite time blowup
whenever n0 is suﬃciently large and
ż

ds
sgpsq2 ă 8,
basically because one can show inductively that Xn0`kptn0`kq is comparable to 1, tn0`k`1´
tn0`k is comparable to λ´n, and the energy dissipation on each time interval rtn0`k, tn0`k`1s
is comparable to
gpλn0`kq2 ; we omit the details. This is compatible with the heuristic
calculation in [39, Remark 1.2]. In the converse direction, the arguments in [27] or [43]
should ensure global regularity for the above equation (or for the analogous hyperdissi-
pative version of (1.17)) under the condition

8

1

1

1

ds
sgpsq4 “ `8.
This leaves an intermediate regime (e.g. gpsq “ logp1 ` sqβ for 1{4 ă β ď 1{2) in
which it is unclear whether one can force blowup28 with any of these ODE models. The
analysis in [27] or [43] suggests that this may be possible, but one would have to work
with models in which many diﬀerent modes are activated at once (in contrast to the
situation in Proposition 5.1, in which only two modes have interesting dynamics at any
given time).

ż

8

5.3. The ampliﬁer gate. The ampliﬁer gate is a reversed version of the pump gate:
Btx “ ´αy2
Bty “ αxy.
Here again α ą 0 is a coupling constant, indicating the strength of the ampliﬁer. We
will use this gate in the regime in which x is positive and large, and y is positive but
small. In this case, we can explicitly solve the second equation to obtain

(5.10)

ˆ

ż

t

˙

yptq “ exp

α

xpt1q dt1

ypt0q

(5.11)

t0
for any t ě t0, which suggests that y grows exponentially at rate comparable to αxp0q,
until such time that the y mode begins to drain a signiﬁcant fraction of energy from the
x mode. Thus, the x mode can be viewed as causing exponential ampliﬁcation in the y
mode. Of course, in the presence of forcing terms, we no longer have the exact formula

28Since the initial release of this manuscript, it has been shown in [6] (see also [5]) that blowup in
fact does not occur in this intermediate regime. Roughly speaking, the basic point is that as the energy
moves from low frequency modes to high frequency modes, it must transition through all intermediate
frequency scales, and the cumulative energy dissipation from such transitions is enough to prevent the
solution from escaping to frequency inﬁnity in this intermediate regime.

40

TERENCE TAO

Figure 3. The ampliﬁer gate from the x mode to the y mode with
coupling constant α.

(5.11), but we may take advantage of Gronwall’s inequality to obtain analogous control
on y.

As with the pump gate, the ampliﬁer gate preserves the total energy x2 `y2. An explicit
solution to (5.10) is given by

xptq “ A tanhpαApT ´ tqq;

yptq “ A sechpαApT ´ tqq

for any A ą 0 and T ą 0. For 0 ă t ă T , the quantity y increases exponentially at rate
about αA, while x stays roughly steady at A.

By using the ampliﬁer with a large coupling constant α, x large and positive, and y
small and positive, we can cause y to grow at a rapid exponential rate, and in particular
to transition abruptly from being small (e.g. y ď ε for some threshold ε) to being large
(e.g. y ą 2ε), if the threshold ε is set low enough that y does not yet begin to drain
signiﬁcant amounts of energy from x. This ability to generate abrupt transitions is of
course needed in our quest to engineer an abrupt delayed transition of energy from one
mode to another. This behaviour can be disrupted if x becomes negative at some point,
but we will avoid this in practice by making x the output of a pump (which, as discussed
previously, can serve to “rectify” an alternating input into a steadily increasing output).
We will represent the ampliﬁer schematically by a triangle-headed arrow (Figure 3).

5.4. The rotor gate. The rotor gate is a ternary gate

Btx “ ´αyz
Bty “ αxz
Btz “ 0

(5.12)

where again α ą 0 is a parameter. This of course preserves the total energy x2 ` y2 ` z2
and has the explicit solution

xptq “ xpt0q cos pαzpt0qpt ´ t0qq ´ ypt0q sin pαzpt0qpt ´ t0qq
yptq “ ypt0q cos pαzpt0qpt ´ t0qq ` xpt0q sin pαzpt0qpt ´ t0qq
zptq “ zpt0q

in which pxptq, yptqq rotates around the origin at a contant angular rate αzpt0q, while z
remains ﬁxed. Thus the z mode can be viewed as driving the oscillating interchange of
energy between the x and y modes.

Because we will be coupling the rotor to various forcing terms in x, y, and z, we cannot
rely directly on the above explicit solution, although this solution is of course very useful
for supplying intuition as to how the rotor behaves. Instead, we will use energy-based
analyses of the rotor, which are much more robust with respect to forcing terms. Firstly

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

41

Figure 4. The rotor gate that uses the z mode to exchange energy
between the x and y modes using the coupling constant α.

we observe that for the rotor with no forcing, the combined energy of the x and y modes
is conserved:

In a related spirit, we have the equipartition of energy identity

Btpx2 ` y2q “ 0.

αzpx2 ´ y2q “ Btpxyq

or in integral form

α

ż

T

t0

zptqpx2ptq ´ y2ptqq dt “ xpT qypT q ´ xpt0qypt0q.

Using the conserved energy x2 ` y2 “ E and the constant nature of z, this becomes

1
T ´ t0

ż

t0

ˆ

˙

T

x2ptq dt “

1
2

E ` O

E
α|zpt0q|pT ´ t0q

and similarly with xptq replaced by yptq. Thus we see that over any time interval
signiﬁcantly longer than the period
α|zpt0q| , the x mode absorbs about half the energy
E of the combined pair x, y, and similarly for y.

2π

In our application, we will use the rotor with the driving mode z being the output of an
ampliﬁer. As noted previously, ampliﬁer outputs can transition rapidly from being small
to being large, so the pair px, yq will initially be almost stationary, and then suddenly
transition to a highly oscillatory state. This creates a “jolt” of “alternating current”,
which we will then quickly transform to “direct current” via a pump gate.

We describe the rotor gate schematically by a loop connecting the x and y modes that
is driven by the z mode: see Figure 4.

5.5. A delayed and abrupt energy transition. We can now build a “quadratic
circuit” that achieves the goal of abruptly transitioning almost all of its energy from one
mode to another, after a certain delay (and thus exhibiting “digital” transition behaviour
rather than “analog” transition behaviour). To describe this circuit, we ﬁrst need a
large parameter K Á 1, together with a very small parameter 0 ă ε À 1 which will be
suﬃciently small depending on K (e.g. one could choose ε :“ 1{ exppexppCKqq for some

42

TERENCE TAO

Figure 5. A circuit that creates a delayed, but abrupt, transition of
energy from a to ˜a.

large absolute constant C). We will then consider a ﬁve-mode circuit X “ pa, b, c, d, ˜aq
obeying the equations

Bta “ ´ε´2cd ´ εab ´ ε2 expp´K 10qac
Btb “ εa2 ´ ε´1K 10c2
Btc “ ε2 expp´K 10qa2 ` ε´1K 10bc
Btd “ ε´2ca ´ Kd˜a
Bt˜a “ Kd2

and with initial data

ap0q “ 1;

bp0q “ cp0q “ dp0q “ ˜ap0q “ 0.

(5.13)

(5.14)

(5.15)

(5.16)

(5.17)

(5.18)

This system looks complicated and artiﬁcial, with a rather arbitrary looking set of cou-
pling constants of wildly diﬀering magnitudes, but it should be viewed as a superposition
of ﬁve quadratic gates:

‚ A pump of coupling constant ε that transfers a small amount of energy from a

to b;

‚ A pump of coupling constant ε2 expp´K 10q that transfers a minute amount of

energy from a to c;

‚ An ampliﬁer of coupling constant ε´1K 10 that uses b to rapidly amplify c;
‚ A rotor of coupling constant ε´2 that uses c to (eventually) rotate energy very

rapidly between a and d; and

‚ A pump of coupling constant K that drains energy from d to ˜a at a moderately

fast pace.

See Figure 5.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

43

One should view a as the input mode for this circuit, and ˜a as the output mode; in later
sections we will chain an inﬁnite sequence of these circuits (rescaled by an exponentially
growing parameter) together by identifying the output mode for each circuit with the
input mode for the next. One can check by hand that this system is of the form (5.1)
with bilinear form G obeying the cancellation condition (5.2) (basically because the
system is composed of gates, each of which individually satisfy this condition).

As a caricature, the evolution of this system can be described as follows, involving a
critical time tc «

?

2:

?

(i) At early times 0 ď t ď tc ´ 1{

K (say), nothing much appears to happen:
a remains very close to 1, b grows linearly like εt, c grows exponentially like
ε2 exppp 1

2t2 ´ 1qK 10q, and d and ˜a are close to 0.

(ii) At a critical time tc «

2, there is an abrupt transition when the exponentially
growing c suddenly (within a time of OpK ´10q or so) transitions from being
much smaller than ε2 to being much larger than ε2. This ignites the rotor gate,
which then begins to rapidly transfer energy between a and d. By equipartition
of energy, d2 will approximately be equal to 1{2 on the average.

?

(iii) After time tc ` 1{K or so, the pump between d and ˜a begins to activate, and
steadily drains the energy from d (which, as mentioned before, contains about
half the energy of the system) to ˜a. Meanwhile, b and c remain very small
(because of the ε factors), but with c large enough to continue the rapid mixing
of energy between a and d throughout this process.

(iv) By time tc ` 1{

K (say), all but an exponentially small remnant of energy has

been drained into ˜a.

We depict these dynamics schematically in Figure 6.

To summarise the above description of the dynamics, this circuit has achieved the stated
goal of creating an abrupt transition (of duration Op1{
Kq) of energy from one mode
?
a to another ˜a, after a long delay (of duration tc «
2). (It is by no means the only
circuit that can accomplish this task, but the author was not able to locate a circuit of
lower complexity that did so.)

?

More formally, we claim

Theorem 5.3 (Delayed abrupt energy transition). If K is suﬃciently large, and ε
suﬃciently small depending on K, then there exists a time

such that

tc “

aptq “ 1 ` OpK ´10q;
?

for 0 ď t ď tc ´ 1{

K, and

?

?

2 ` Op1{

Kq

bptq, cptq, dptq, ˜aptq “ OpK ´10q

˜aptq “ 1 ` OpK ´10q;

aptq, bptq, cptq, dptq “ OpK ´10q

for t ě tc ` 1{

K.

?

(5.19)

(5.20)

(5.21)

?

44

TERENCE TAO

Figure 6. A schematic description (not entirely drawn to scale) of the
dynamics of a, b, c, d, ˜a before, near, and after the critical time tc. Note
that b and c are of signiﬁcantly smaller magnitude (by powers of ε) than
the other modes a, d, ˜a, even after taking into account the exponential
growth of c. Note also how the pump gates convert alternating inputs to
monotone outputs, and how the ampliﬁer gate converts a slowly growing
input to an exponentially growing output. Finally, observe the transient
nature of d, which only plays a role near the critical time tc; the bulk
of the energy is concentrated at the a mode before time tc and at the ˜a
mode after time tc.

Proof. We shall use the usual bootstrap procedure of starting with crude estimates and
steadily reﬁning them to stronger estimates on this interval, using continuity arguments

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

45

if necessary in case the crude estimates are initially only available at t “ 0 rather than
for all t P r0, 2s.

From conservation of energy and (5.18) we have

aptq2 ` bptq2 ` cptq2 ` dptq2 ` ˜aptq2 “ 1

throughout this interval. In particular, we have

aptq, bptq, cptq, dptq, ˜aptq “ Op1q.

(5.22)

(5.23)

We can improve this bound on b and c as follows. From (5.14), (5.15) we have the local
energy identity

Btpb2 ` c2q “ 2εa2b ` 2ε2 expp´K 10qa2c

and thus by (5.23)

or equivalently

Btpb2 ` c2q “ O

`

εpb2 ` c2q1{2

˘

`

Bt

pb2 ` c2q1{2

˘

“ Opεq

(in a weak derivative29 sense), and so from (5.18) and the fundamental theorem of
calculus we see in particular that

for t P r0, 2s. Inserting this into (5.15), we see that

bptq, cptq “ Opεq

Btc “ Opε2 expp´K 10qq ` OpK 10cq

(5.24)

(5.25)

for t P r0, 2s (note from the initial condition cp0q “ 0 and a comparison argument that
cptq ě 0 for all t ě 0). By Gronwall’s inequality we thus have

0 ď cptq À ε2 exp

pCt ´ 1qK 10

`

˘

(5.26)

for all t P r0, 2s and some absolute constant C ą 0. Finally, from (5.16), (5.17) we have
the local energy identity

and hence by (5.23)

Btpd2 ` ˜a2q “ 2ε´2cad

`

Bt

pd2 ` ˜a2q1{2

˘

“ Opε´2cq

and thus by (5.18) and the fundamental theorem of calculus

ˆ

ż

t

˙

dptq, ˜aptq “ O

ε´2

cpt1q dt1

.

In particular, from (5.26) we have

|dptq|, |˜aptq| À K ´10 exp

which is a good bound for short times t ď 1{C.

0

`

pCt ´ 1qK 10

˘

,

(5.27)

(5.28)

29To justify this step (a very simple example of the diamagnetic inequality (see e.g. [30, §7.19-7.22])
in action), one can ﬁrst work instead with pb2 ` c2 ` δq1{2 for some small δ ą 0, in order to avoid any
singularity, and then take distributional limits as δ Ñ 0.

46

TERENCE TAO

Having obtained crude bounds on all ﬁve quantities aptq, bptq, cptq, dptq, ˜aptq, we now
return to obtain sharper bounds on these quantities. Let tc be the supremum of all the
times t P r0, 2s for which cpt1q ď K ´10ε2 for all 0 ď t1 ď t, thus 0 ă tc ď 2 and

cptq ď K ´10ε2

(5.29)

for t P r0, tcs. Comparing this with (5.26) we conclude that tc Á 1. From (5.27) we have
|dptq|, |˜aptq| À K ´10

for t P r0, tcs. Inserting these bounds and (5.24) back into (5.13), we have

Bta “ OpK ´20q ` Opε2q
on r0, tcs, so from (5.18) (and assuming ε suﬃciently small depending on K) we have
aptq “ 1 ` OpK ´20q

for t P r0, tcs. This already gives all the bounds (5.20). Inserting the a bound into (5.14)
and using (5.29), we have

Btb “ ε ` OpK ´20εq ` OpK ´10ε3q

and so from (5.18) (again assuming ε suﬃciently small depending on K) we have

bptq “ εt ` OpK ´20εq

(5.30)

for t P r0, tcs. Inserting these bounds into (5.15), we have

Btc “ p1 ` OpK ´20qqε2 expp´K 10q ` pK 10t ` OpK ´10qqc

and hence by (5.18) and Gronwall’s inequality
`

ˆż

ż

˘

t

t

˙

`

cptq “

exp

K 10t2 ` OpK ´10q

0

t1

`

“

˘
1 ` OpK ´10q

ε2 exp

ˆˆ

1
2

dt2
˙

˘
1 ` OpK ´20q
˙ ż

ˆ

t

t2 ´ 1

K 10

exp

´

0

ε2 expp´K 10q dt1
˙

pt1q2K 10

dt1

1
2

for t P r0, tcs. In particular (since tc Á 1), standard asymptotics on the error function
give

ˆˆ

˙

˙ c

cptcq “

`

˘
1 ` OpK ´10q

ε2 exp

1
2

t2
c ´ 1

K 10

π
2K 10

which, when compared against the deﬁnition of tc, shows (5.19). In particular, tc ă 2
(for K large enough), and so

cptcq “ K ´10ε2.

(5.31)

Having described the evolution up to time tc, we now move to the future of tc. From
(5.30) we have

Meanwhile, from (5.26), (5.14) (discarding the non-negative εa2 term) we have

bptcq Á ε.

Btb ě ´ε3 exppOpK 10qq

for t P rtc, 2s, so (for ε small enough) we also have

bptq Á ε

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

47

for t P rtc, 2s. Inserting this bound into (5.15), and discarding the non-negative ε2 expp´K 10qa2
term, we arrive at the exponential growth

Btcptq Á K 10cptq

for t P rtc, 2s. From this, (5.31), and Gronwall’s inequality, we see in particular that

cptq ě K 100ε2

(5.32)

for t in the time interval I :“ rtc ` K ´9, 2s.
In other words, the rotor gate will be
continuously and strongly activated from time tc ` K ´9 onwards. On the other hand,
from (5.25), (5.32) we also have

Btcptq “ OpK 10cptqq

(5.33)

for t P I, so the exponential growth rate of c remains under control in this region.

Now we use equipartition of energy to establish some reasonably rapid energy drain
from a, b, c, d to ˜a. From (5.13)-(5.16) one has

Btpa2 ` b2 ` c2 ` d2q “ ´2Kd2˜a.

Similarly, from (5.13), (5.16), and (5.23) one has

Btpadq “ ε´2cpa2 ´ d2q ´ OpKq.

Finally, from (5.17), (5.23) one has

We conclude using (5.32), (5.33), and the product rule that

Bt˜a “ OpKq.

Btpad

ε2
c

˜aq “ ´pa2 ´ d2q˜a ´ ad

ε2
c

Btc
c

˜a ` ad

ε2
c

Bt˜a ` OpK ´99q

(5.34)

for t P I, so if we deﬁne the modiﬁed energy

“ ´pa2 ´ d2q˜a ` OpK ´90q

then

E˚ :“

1
2

pa2 ` b2 ` c2 ` d2q `

1
2

Kad

ε2
c

˜a

BtE˚ “ ´

1
2

Kpa2 ` d2q˜a ` OpK ´80q

for t P I. From (5.24) we have

E˚ “

1
2

pa2 ` b2 ` c2 ` d2q ` OpK ´99q “

1
2

pa2 ` d2q ` OpK ´99q

(5.35)

and thus

BtE˚ “ ´K˜aE˚ ` OpK ´80q.
Starting with the crude bound E˚ptcq “ Op1q from (5.35), we thus see from Gronwall’s
inequality that

ˆ

ż

t

˙

E˚ptq À exp

´K

˜apt1q dt1

` OpK ´80q

tc

for all t P I.

Observe from (5.17) that ˜a is non-decreasing, and thus

E˚ptq À expp´Kpt ´ t1q˜apt1qq ` OpK ´80q

(5.36)

48

TERENCE TAO

whenever tc ď t1 ď t ď 2. We will use this bound with t1 :“ tc ` 1{K. We claim that

˜aptc ` 1{Kq ě 0.1.

(5.37)

Suppose this is not the case; then by (5.17) we have

However, by repeating the derivation of (5.34) we have
ˆ

˙

Bt

ad

“ ´pa2 ´ d2q ` OpK ´90q

tc`1{K

dpt2q2 dt2 ď

1
10K

.

ż

tc

ε2
c

and hence by the fundamental theorem of calculus and (5.32) we have

tc`1{K

papt2q2 ´ dpt2q2q dt2 “ OpK ´90q;

combining this with the previous estimate, we conclude that

1
2

pa2 ` d2qpt2q dt2 ď

1
10K

` OpK ´90q.

ż

tc

ż

tc`1{K

tc

On the other hand, for t2 P rtc, tc ` 1{Ks one has ˜aptq ď 0.1 by monotonicity of ˜a, and
hence by (5.35), (5.22) we have

in this interval, giving the required contradiction.

a2 ` d2 ě 0.99 ` OpK ´99q

Inserting the bound (5.37) into (5.36), we conclude in particular that

E˚ptq À K ´80

for tc ` 1?

K ď t ď 2, and (5.21) follows from (5.35) and (5.22).

(cid:3)

6. Blowup for the cascade ODE

We can now prove Theorem 4.2 (and hence Theorem 3.3 and Theorem 1.5). The idea
is to chain together an inﬁnite sequence of circuits of the form (5.13)-(5.17), so that (a
more complicated version of) the analysis from Theorem 5.3 may be applied.

6.1. First step: constructing the ODE. Let (cid:15)0 ą 0 be ﬁxed; we allow all implied
constants in the Opq notation to depend on (cid:15)0. As in the previous section, we need a
large constant K ě 1, which we assume to be suﬃciently large depending on (cid:15)0, and
then a small constant 0 ă ε ă 1, which we assume to be suﬃciently small depending
on both K and (cid:15)0. Finally, we take n0 suﬃciently large depending on (cid:15)0, K, ε.

The reader may wish to keep in mind the hierarchy of parameters

1 !

1
(cid:15)0

! K !

1
ε

! n0

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

49

Table 1. The non-zero values of αi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3.

i1

i2

3
4
1
3
1
2
1
1
3
1
3
2
3
4
1
4

4
3
3
1
2
1
1
3
1
1
3
3
2
4
4
1

i3 µ1 µ2 µ3 αi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3
1
1
4
4
1
1
2
1
1
3
2
3
3
1
4
4

0 ´ε´2{2
0 ´ε´2{2
ε´2{2
0
ε´2{2
0
0 ´ε{2
0 ´ε{2
0
ε
0 ´ε2 expp´K 10q{2
0 ´ε2 expp´K ´10q{2
ε2 exppK ´10q
0
0 ´ε´1K 10
ε´1K 10{2
0
ε´1K 10{2
0
p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2K
1
0 ´p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2K{2
0 ´p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2K{2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0

as a heuristic for comparing the magnitude of various quantities appearing in the sequel.
´
will be smaller
Thus, for instance, a quantity of the form O
than exp p´K 10q ε2; a quantity of the form O pexp pO pK 10qq εq will be smaller than
K ´100; and so forth.

exp pO pK 10qq p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2

¯

The dimension parameter m for the system we will use to prove Theorem 4.2 will
be taken to be m “ 4. We set the coeﬃcients αi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3 by using Table 1, with
αi1,i2,i3,µ1,µ2,µ3 set equal to zero if it does not appear in the above table. It is clear that
the required symmetry property (4.2) and the cancellation property (4.3) hold. Also,
the hypotheses of Lemma 4.1(v) are satisﬁed.

Suppose for contradiction that Theorem 4.2 fails for this choice of parameters, so that
we have global continuously diﬀerentiable functions Xi,n : r0, `8q Ñ R and Ei,n :
r0, `8q Ñ r0, `8q obeying the conclusions of Lemma 4.1. More precisely, by Lemma
4.1(i), we have the a priori regularity
`

˘

1 ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q10n

|Xi,nptq| ă 8

(6.1)

sup
0ďtďT

sup
nPZ

sup
i“1,...,4

and

for all 0 ă T ă 8.

sup
0ďtďT

sup
nPZ

sup
i“1,...,4

`

1 ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q10n

˘

Ei,nptq1{2 ă 8,

It will be convenient to work with the combined energy

En :“ E1,n ` E2,n ` E3,n ` E4,n,

50

TERENCE TAO

Figure 7. A portion of the system (6.3)-(6.6), focusing on the modes at
or near scale n, and ignoring the dissipation terms. Compare with Figure
5.

so that

for all 0 ă T ă 8.

`

sup
0ďtďT

sup
nPZ

1 ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q10n

˘

Enptq1{2 ă 8

(6.2)

By Lemma 4.1(iii), we have the equations of motion

BtX1,n “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5n{2p´ε´2X3,nX4,n ´ εX1,nX2,n ´ ε2 expp´K 10qX1,nX3,n ` KX 2

`

˘

n

p1 ` (cid:15)0q2nE1{2

` O
p1 ` (cid:15)0q2nE1{2
BtX2,n “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5n{2pεX 2
BtX3,n “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5n{2pε2 expp´K 10qX 2
1,n ` ε´1K 10X2,nX3,nq ` O
BtX4,n “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5n{2pε´2X3,nX1,n ´ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2KX4,nX1,n`1q ` O

1,n ´ ε´1K 10X 2

3,nq ` O

˘

`

n

`

˘

p1 ` (cid:15)0q2nE1{2
`
p1 ` (cid:15)0q2nE1{2

n

n

(compare with (5.13)-(5.17)) and the local energy inequality

BtEn ď p1 ` (cid:15)0q5n{2KX 2

4,n´1X1,n ´ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5pn`1q{2KX 2

4,nX1,n`1

for any n P Z and t ě 0.

Remark 6.1. As mentioned in the previous section, if one ignores the dissipation terms,
the system (6.3)-(6.6) describes an inﬁnite number of (rescaled) copies of the quadratic
circuit analysed in Theorem 5.3, with the output of each such circuit chained to the
input of a slightly faster-running version of the same circuit; see Figure 7.

4,n´1q
(6.3)

(6.4)

(6.5)

˘

(6.6)

(6.7)

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

51

By Lemma 4.1(iii), we have the initial conditions

Enp0q “

1
2

1n“n0; Xi,np0q “ 1pi,nq“p1,n0q

(6.8)

for all n P Z and i “ 1, . . . , 4.

By Lemma 4.1(iv), we have
4ÿ

1
2

i“1

X 2

i,nptq ď Enptq ď

ˆ

X 2

i,nptq ` O

p1 ` (cid:15)0q2n

˙

Enpt1q dt1

(6.9)

ż

t

0

1
2

4ÿ

i“1

for any n P Z and t ě 0.

Finally, from Lemma 4.1(v) we have

Enptq “ X1,nptq “ X2,nptq “ X3,nptq “ X4,nptq “ 0

(6.10)

for all n ă n0 and t ě 0.

To prove Theorem 4.2, it thus suﬃces to show

Theorem 6.2 (No global solution for ODE system). Let 0 ă (cid:15)0 ă 1, let K ą 0 be
suﬃciently large depending on (cid:15)0, let ε ą 0 be suﬃciently small depending on (cid:15)0, K, and
let n0 be suﬃciently large depending on (cid:15)0, K, ε, and the implied constants in (6.3), (6.6),
(6.9). Then there does not exist continuously diﬀerentiable functions Xi,n : r0, `8q Ñ R
and En : r0, `8q Ñ r0, `8q obeying the estimates and equations (6.1)-(6.10) for the
indicated range of parameters.

It remains to prove Theorem 6.2.

6.2. Second step: describing the blowup dynamics. We will establish the follow-
ing description of the dynamics of Xi,n and Ei,n:

Proposition 6.3 (Blowup dynamics). Let the hypotheses and notation be as in Theorem
6.2, and suppose for contradiction that we may ﬁnd continuously diﬀerentiable functions
Xi,n : r0, `8q Ñ R and En : r0, `8q Ñ r0, `8q with the stated properties (6.1)-(6.10).

Let N ě n0 be an integer. Then there exist times

0 ď tn0 ă tn0`1 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă tN ă 8

and amplitudes

obeying the following properties:

(vi) (Initialisation) We have

and

en0, . . . , eN ą 0

tn0 “ 0

en0 “ 1.

(6.11)

(6.12)

52

TERENCE TAO

(vii) (Scale evolution) For all n0 ă n ď N , one has the amplitude stability

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´1{100en´1 ď en ď p1 ` (cid:15)0q1{100en´1

and the lifespan bound

1
100

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5pn´1q{2e´1

n´1 ď tn ´ tn´1 ď 100p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5pn´1q{2e´1

n´1.

(viii) (Transition state) For all n0 ď n ď N , we have the bounds

X1,nptnq “ en
|X2,nptnq| ď 10´5εen
|X3,nptnq| ď 10´5 expp´K 10qε2en
X3,nptnq ě ´p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{4en
|X4,nptnq| ď K ´10en
En´1ptnq ď K ´20e2
n.

If n0 ă n ď N , we have the additional bounds

(6.13)

(6.14)

(6.15)

(6.16)

(6.17)

(6.18)

(6.19)

(6.20)

X2,n´1ptnq ě 10´5εen
X2,n´1ptnq ď 105εen
X3,n´1ptnq ě exppK 9qε2en.
X3,n´1ptnq ď exppK 10qε2en.
(ix) (Energy estimates) For all n0 ă n ď N and tn´1 ď t ď tn, we have the bounds

(6.21)

(6.22)

(6.23)

(6.24)

En´mptq ď K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0qm{10e2

n´1 for all m ě 2

En´1ptq ` Enptq ď e2

n´1
En`mptq ď K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´10me2

n´1 for all m ě 1

(6.25)

(6.26)

(6.27)

These bounds may appear somewhat complicated, but roughly speaking they assert that
at each time tn, the solution concentrates an important part of its energy at scale n
(and signiﬁcantly less energy at adjacent scales); see Table 2 and Figure 8. The precise
bounds here do have to be chosen carefully, because of a rather intricate induction
argument in which the estimates for a given value of N are used to prove the estimates
for N ` 1. For this reason, no use of the asymptotic notation Opq appears in the above
proposition. Of the four modes X1,n, X2,n, X3,n, X4,n, it is the ﬁrst mode X1,n that
carries most of the energy at the checkpoint time tn; the secondary modes X2,n, X3,n
play an important role in driving the dynamics (and so many of the more technical
bounds in (viii) are devoted to controlling these modes) but carry30 very little energy,
while the X4,n mode is only used as a conduit to transfer energy from the X1,n mode
to the X1,n`1 mode. The bounds (6.21)-(6.24) are technical; they are needed to ensure
that the rotor at scale n ´ 1 is rotating so quickly that the modes at scale n ´ 1 do
not cause any “constructive interference” with the modes at scale n at time tn (or at
slightly later times).

30As a crude ﬁrst approximation (ignoring factors depending on K), one should think of X2,n as

being about ε the size of X1,n or X4,n, and X3,n being about ε2 the size of X1,n or X4,n.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

53

Table 2. Upper bounds for energies at scales close to N , at times close
to tN . Note that at time tN , the energy is locally concentrated at scale
N , but transitions as tN ď t ď tN `1 to a state at time t “ tN `1 at which
the energy is locally concentrated at scale N ` 1.

Energy tN ´1 ă t ă tN
EN ´2 K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0q2{10e2
EN ´1
EN
EN `1 K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´10e2
EN `2 K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´20e2

e2
N ´1
e2
N ´1

t “ tN

N ´1 K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0q2{10e2

K ´20eN
p 1
2 ` OpK ´20qqe2
N
N ´1 K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´10e2
N ´1 K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´20e2

tN ă t ă tN `1
N ´1 K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0q3{10e2
K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0q2{10e2
e2
N
e2
N

N ´1
N ´1 K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´10e2

t “ tN `1

N K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0q3{10e2
N
N K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0q2{10e2
N
K ´20e2
N `1
p 1
2 ` OpK ´20qqe2
N K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´10e2
N

N `1

Figure 8. A schematic description (not entirely drawn to scale) of the
dynamics of the energies En for n close to N and times close to tN .
Observe that the energy is concentrated at a single scale N for a lengthy
time interval (most of rtN , tN `1s), but then abruptly transfers almost all
of its energy (minus some losses due to dissipation and interaction with
other scales) to the next ﬁner scale N ` 1 by the time tN `1. The length
of the time intervals rtN , tN `1s decreases geometrically, leading to blowup
at some ﬁnite time T .

Let us now see how the above proposition implies Theorem 6.2 (and hence Theorem 4.2,
Theorem 3.3 and Theorem 1.5). Let N ě n0 be arbitrary. From (6.12), (6.13), (6.14)
we have

tn ´ tn´1 À p1 ` (cid:15)0q´p 5

2 ´ 1

100 qn

and hence by (6.11) and summing the geometric series we have

tN ď T
for some ﬁnite T “ T(cid:15)0 independent of N . On the other hand, from (6.15), (6.13), (6.12)
we have

|X1,N ptN q| ě p1 ` (cid:15)0q´N {100

and hence

sup
0ďtďT

sup
nPZ

sup
i“1,...,4

p1 ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q10nqXi,nptq ě p1 ` (cid:15)0q9N

for any N . Sending N to inﬁnity, we contradict (6.1).

6.3. Third step: setting up the induction. It remains to prove Proposition 6.3.
We do so by an induction on N . The base case N “ n0 is easy: one sets tn0 “ 0 and

54

TERENCE TAO

en0 “ 1, and all the required claims are either vacuously true or follow immediately from
the initial conditions (6.8). It remains to establish the inductive case of this proposition.
For the convenience of the reader, we state this inductive case as an explicit proposition.

Proposition 6.4 (Blowup dynamics, inductive case). Let the hypotheses and notation
be as in Theorem 6.2, and suppose for contradiction that we may ﬁnd continuously
diﬀerentiable functions Xi,n : r0, `8q Ñ R and En : r0, `8q Ñ r0, `8q with the stated
properties (6.1)-(6.10).

Assume that Proposition 6.3 has already been established for some N ě n0, giving times

and energies

0 ď tn0 ă tn0`1 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă tN ă 8

en0, . . . , eN ą 0

with the properties (6.11)-(6.27) stated in that proposition. Then there exists a time

and an amplitude eN `1 ą 0 obeying the following properties:

tN ă tN `1 ă 8

(vii’) (Scale evolution) One has the amplitude stability

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´1{100eN ď eN `1 ď p1 ` (cid:15)0q1{100eN

(6.28)

and the lifespan bound

1
100

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5N {2e´1

N ď tN `1 ´ tN ď 100p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5N {2e´1
N .

(6.29)

(viii’) (Transition state) We have the bounds

X1,N `1ptN `1q “ eN `1
|X2,N `1ptN `1q| ď 10´5εeN `1
|X3,N `1ptN `1q| ď 10´5 expp´K 10qε2eN `1
X3,N `1ptN `1q ě ´p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{4eN `1
|X4,N `1ptN `1q| ď K ´10eN `1
EN ptN `1q ď K ´20e2
N `1
X2,N ptN `1q ě 10´5εeN `1
X2,N ptN `1q ď 105εeN `1
X3,N ptN `1q ě exppK 9qε2e2
X3,N ptN `1q ď exppK 10qε2e2

N `1.
N `1.

(ix’) (Energy estimates) For all tN ď t ď tN `1, we have the bounds

EN `1´mptq ď K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0qm{10e2

N for all m ě 2

EN ptq ` EN `1ptq ď e2
N
EN `1`mptq ď K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´10me2

N for all m ě 1

(6.30)

(6.31)

(6.32)

(6.33)

(6.34)

(6.35)

(6.36)

(6.37)

(6.38)

(6.39)

(6.40)

(6.41)

(6.42)

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

55

Clearly, Proposition 6.4 implies Proposition 6.3 (and hence Theorems 6.2, 4.2, 3.3 and
1.5).

Roughly speaking, the situation is as follows. At time tN , the solution pXi,nqi“1,...,4;nPZ
has a large amount of energy at a single mode X1,N at scale N (thanks to (6.15)) and
small amounts of energy at nearby modes and scales (thanks to (6.16), (6.17), (6.19),
(6.20), (6.25), (6.27)). We wish to run the evolution forward to a later time tN `1
(which can be approximately determined using (6.29)) for which the energy near scale
N has now largely transitioned to the X1,N `1 mode (see (6.30), (6.28)), but with little
energy at nearby modes and scales (see (6.31), (6.32), (6.35), (6.40), (6.34), (6.42)). In
particular, the transition of energy to the X1,N `1 mode needs to be so abrupt that no
signiﬁcant amount of energy leaks into the N ` 2 modes yet (see (6.42)). To establish
this, we shall ﬁrst show (under a bootstrap hypothesis) that all scales other31 than the
N and N ` 1 scales are under control, thus largely reducing matters to the study of the
dynamics between the N and N ` 1 modes, at which point one can run the analysis
used to establish Theorem 5.3.

6.4. Fourth step: renormalising the dynamics. It is convenient to perform a
rescaling to essentially eliminate the role of the time tN , the energy eN , and the scale
p1 ` (cid:15)0q´N , in order to make the dynamics closely resemble those in Theorem 5.3. More
precisely, Proposition 6.4 rescales as follows.

Proposition 6.5 (Rescaled inductive step). Let 0 ă (cid:15)0 ă 1, let K ą 0 be suﬃciently
large depending on (cid:15)0, let ε ą 0 be suﬃciently small depending on (cid:15)0, K, and let n0
be suﬃciently large depending on (cid:15)0, K, ε, and the implied constants in (6.45)-(6.48),
(6.51), (6.53) below. Let N ě n0, and suppose we have rescaled times

τn0´N ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă τ0 “ 0

and continuously diﬀerentiable functions ak, bk, ck, dk : rτn0´N , `8q Ñ R and ˜Ek :
rτn0´N , `8q Ñ r0, `8q obeying the following properties:

(i) (A priori regularity) We have
`

˘

1 ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q10k

sup
τn0´N ďtďT

sup
kPZ

and

sup
τn0´N ďtďT

sup
kPZ

for any T ą τn0´N .

p|akptq| ` |bkptq| ` |ckptq| ` |dkptq|q ă 8

(6.43)

`

1 ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q10k

˘

˜Ekptq1{2 ă 8,

(6.44)

31This is an oversimpliﬁcation; one has to take some care to also exclude the possibility of “con-
structive interference” between the N ´ 1 and N modes, but this is a technical issue of secondary
importance.

56

TERENCE TAO

Btak “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5k{2

´ε´2ckdk ´ εakbk ´ ε2 expp´K 10qakck ` Kd2

˘

k´1

(ii) (Equations of motion) One has
`

´
p1 ` (cid:15)0q2k´n0{2 ˜E1{2

k

¯

` O

Btbk “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5k{2

Btck “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5k{2

Btdk “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5k{2

`

`

`

and

εa2

k ´ ε´1K 10c2
k

ε2 expp´K 10qa2

˘

` O

´
p1 ` (cid:15)0q2k´n0{2 ˜E1{2

k

¯

k ` ε´1K 10bkck
˘

˘

` O

¯

´
p1 ` (cid:15)0q2k´n0{2 ˜E1{2
¯

´
p1 ` (cid:15)0q2k´n0{2 ˜E1{2

k

k

ε´2ckak ´ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2Kdkak`1

` O

˜Ek ď Kp1 ` (cid:15)0q5k{2pd2

k´1ak ´ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2d2

kak`1q

Bt
for all k P Z and t ě τn0´N .
(iii) (Initial conditions) One has

(6.45)

(6.46)

(6.47)

(6.48)

(6.49)

akpτn0´N q “ bkpτn0´N q “ ckpτn0´N q “ dkpτn0´N q “ ˜Ekpτn0´N q “ 0

(6.50)

whenever k ą n0 ´ N .

(iv) (Energy defect) One has

kptq ` b2
a2

kptq ` c2

kptq ` d2

˘
kptq

`

1
2

ď ˜Ekptq
`
1
2

ď

kptq ` b2
a2
˜

kptq ` c2

kptq ` d2
ż

t

˘
kptq

˜Ekpt1q dt1

` O

p1 ` (cid:15)0q2k´n0{2

τn0´N

whenever k P Z and t ě τn0´N .
(v) (No very low frequencies) One has

akptq “ bkptq “ ckptq “ dkptq “ ˜Ekptq “ 0

whenever k ă n0 ´ N and t ě τn0´N .

(vii) (Scale evolution) One has
´
p1 ` (cid:15)0qp 5

´ O

2 ` 1

100 q|k|

¯

ď τk ď 0

for any n0 ´ N ď k ď 0.

(viii) (Transition state) We have

a0p0q “ 1
|b0p0q| ď 10´5ε
|c0p0q| ď 10´5 expp´K 10qε2
c0p0q ě ´p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{4

|d0p0q| ď K ´10
˜E´1p0q ď K ´20

¸ (6.51)

(6.52)

(6.53)

(6.54)

(6.55)

(6.56)

(6.57)

(6.58)

(6.59)

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

57

and if N ą n0 we have the additional bounds

b´1p0q ě 10´5ε
b´1p0q ď 105ε
c´1p0q ě exppK 9qε2.
c´1p0q ď exppK 10qε2.

(ix) (Energy estimates) We have

˜Ek´mptq ď K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0qm{10`|k´1|{50 for all m ě 2

˜Ek´1ptq ` ˜Ekptq ď p1 ` (cid:15)0q|k´1|{50

˜Ek`mptq ď K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´10m`|k´1|{50 for all m ě 1

whenever n0 ´ N ă k ď 0 and τk´1 ď t ď τk.

Then there exists a time

and an amplitude

1
100

ď τ1 ď 100

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´1{100 ď µ1 ď p1 ` (cid:15)0q1{100

such that we have the bounds

a1pτ1q “ µ1
|b1pτ1q| ď 10´5εµ1
|c1pτ1q| ď 10´5 expp´K 10qε2µ1
c1pτ1q ě ´p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{4µ1

|d1pτ1q| ď K ´10µ1
˜E0pτ1q ď K ´20µ2
1.
b0pτ1q ě 10´5εµ1
b0pτ1q ď 105εµ1
c0pτ1q ě exppK 9qε2µ1
c0pτ1q ď exppK 10qε2µ1

and

for all 0 ď t ď τ1.

˜E1´mptq ď K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0qm{10 for all m ě 2

˜E0ptq ` ˜E1ptq ď 1

˜E1`mptq ď K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´10m for all m ě 1

(6.60)

(6.61)

(6.62)

(6.63)

(6.64)

(6.65)

(6.66)

(6.67)

(6.68)

(6.69)

(6.70)

(6.71)

(6.72)

(6.73)

(6.74)

(6.75)

(6.76)

(6.77)

(6.78)

(6.79)

(6.80)

(6.81)

Remark 6.6. The dynamics (6.45)-(6.48) are depicted in Figure 9 (with the dissipative
terms ignored). Note how the rescaling has placed the tiny factor of p1`(cid:15)0q´n0{2 in front
of all the viscosity terms in (6.45)-(6.48), thus highlighting the lower order nature of
these terms for our analysis. This small factor is ultimately reﬂecting the supercritical

58

TERENCE TAO

Figure 9. A portion of the rescaled dynamics (6.45)-(6.48), again ignor-
ing the dissipation terms. The factors of p1 ` (cid:15)0q here play no signiﬁcant
role and may be ignored at a ﬁrst reading.

nature of the dissipation; in practice, this factor will allow us to treat all dissipative
terms as negligible.

Let us now explain why Proposition 6.5 implies Proposition 6.4 (and hence Proposition
6.3 and Theorems 6.2, 4.2, 3.3 and 1.5). Let the notation and hypotheses be as in
Proposition 6.4. We then deﬁne the rescaled times

and rescaled amplitudes

τk :“ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5N {2eN ptN `k ´ tN q

µk :“ e´1

N eN `k

(6.82)

(6.83)

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

59

for n0 ´ N ď k ď 0, as well as the rescaled solutions
akptq :“ e´1
bkptq :“ e´1
ckptq :“ e´1
dkptq :“ e´1

˘
tN ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5N {2e´1
N t
˘
tN ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5N {2e´1
N t
˘
tN ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5N {2e´1
N t
˘
tN ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5N {2e´1
N t

N X1,N `k
N X2,N `k
N X3,N `k
N X4,N `k

`

`

`

`

and rescaled energies

˜Ekptq :“ e´2

N EN `k

`

˘
tN ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5N {2e´1
N t

for k P Z and t ě τn0´N . Under this rescaling, the a priori regularity (6.43), (6.44)
follows from (6.1), (6.2). The bound

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´|k|{100 ď µk ď p1 ` (cid:15)0q|k|{100

(6.84)

for n0 ´N ď k ď 0 follows from (6.13) and (6.83); from this, (6.14), (6.82) and summing
the geometric series we then obtain (6.53) (recall that we allow implied constants in the
À or Opq notation to depend on (cid:15)0).

If we directly rescale (6.3)-(6.6), we obtain (6.45)-(6.48), except with the factors p1 `
(cid:15)0q2k´n0{2 replaced by p1 ` (cid:15)0q2k´N {2e´1

N . However, from (6.13), (6.12) we have

and hence

N ď p1 ` (cid:15)0qpN ´n0q{100
e´1

p1 ` (cid:15)0q2k´N {2e´1

N ď p1 ` (cid:15)0q2k´n0{2.

This gives the equations of motion (6.45)-(6.48). The energy inequality (6.49) is simi-
larly obtained from rescaling (6.7).

The initial conditions (6.50) follow from rescaling (6.8) (and also using (6.11)). Similarly,
(6.51) follows from rescaling (6.9), and (6.52) follows from rescaling (6.10). Similarly,
the conditions (6.54)-(6.63) follow from rescaling (6.15)-(6.24). Finally, (6.64)-(6.66)
follow from rescaling (6.25)-(6.27) and using (6.84). We then apply Proposition 6.5 to
obtain τ1, µ1 with the stated properties (6.67)-(6.81). It is then routine to verify that
the conclusions of Proposition 6.4 are satisﬁed with

and

tN `1 :“ tN ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5N {2e´1

N τ1

eN `1 :“ µ1eN .

For future reference, we record one consequence of the energy estimates (6.64)-(6.66):

Lemma 6.7 (Cumulative energy bound). For any integer m “ Op1q, one has

ż

0

˜Emptq dt À 1.

(The implied constant here may depend on m.)

τn0´N

60

TERENCE TAO

Proof. From (6.65), (6.66) we have

˜Emptq À p1 ` (cid:15)0q10k`|k|{50

whenever τk´1 ď t ď τk and n0 ´ N ă k ď 0, and so

ż

0

˜Emptq dt À

ÿ

p1 ` (cid:15)0q10k`|k|{50|τk´1|.

τn0´N

n0´N ăkď0

Applying (6.53) and summing the geometric series, we obtain the claim.

(cid:3)

6.5. Fifth step: crude energy estimates for distant modes. We now begin the
proof of Proposition 6.5. For the rest of this section, we assume the notations and
hypotheses are as in that proposition.

The ﬁrst stage is to establish the energy bounds (6.79), (6.80), (6.81) (and also the
bound (6.73)) on a certain time interval 0 ď t ď T1; the quantity τ1 will later be chosen
between 0 and T1, thus establishing the required bounds (6.79), (6.80), (6.81), (6.73)
for 0 ď t ď τ1.

We ﬁrst establish bounds at time t “ 0 that are slightly better than the required bounds
(6.79), (6.80), (6.81), (6.73).

Lemma 6.8 (Initial bounds). Let the notation and assumptions be as in Proposition
6.5. Then we have

˜E1´mp0q ď p1 ` (cid:15)0q´0.08K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0qm{10 for all m ě 2

˜E0p0q ` ˜E1p0q ď 0.6

˜E1`mp0q ď p1 ` (cid:15)0q´9.98K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´10m for all m ě 1

?

|d1p0q| ď

2K ´15.

(6.85)

(6.86)

(6.87)

(6.88)

Proof. From (6.64), (6.66) for k “ 0 and t “ 0, we have

˜E´mp0q ď K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0qm{10`1{50 for all m ě 2

(6.89)

and

˜Emp0q ď K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´10m`1{50 for all m ě 1
which implies the claims (6.85) for all m ě 3 and (6.87) for m ě 1, after shifting m by
one. The claim (6.85) for m “ 2 follows from (6.59) (since K is large depending on (cid:15)0).
Also, from (6.90) we have

(6.90)

˜E1p0q ď K ´30;

(6.91)

the claim (6.88) then follows from (6.51).

It remains to establish (6.86). From (6.51) one has

˜

˜E0p0q ď

`

1
2

0p0q ` b2
a2

0p0q ` c2

0p0q ` d2

0p0q

˘

` O

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2

¸

˜E0ptq dt

.

ż

0

τn0´N

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

61

From (6.54)-(6.58) we have

1
2

pa2

0p0q ` b2

0p0q ` c2

0p0q ` d2

0p0qq “ 0.5 ` OpK ´10q.

Applying Lemma 6.7, and recalling that K and n0 are assumed suﬃciently large, the
(cid:3)
claim (6.86) follows.

We now deﬁne T1 to be the largest time in r0, 100s for which one has the bounds

˜E1´mptq ď K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0qm{10 for all m ě 2

˜E0ptq ` ˜E1ptq ď 1

˜E1`mptq ď K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´10m for all m ě 1

|d1ptq| ď

1
2

K ´10.

(6.92)

(6.93)

(6.94)

(6.95)

for all 0 ď t ď T1. Lemma 6.8 ensures that T1 is well-deﬁned (note that all the conditions
here are closed conditions in t).

We record a variant of the arguments in Lemma 6.8 that will be needed later:

Lemma 6.9 (Almost all energy in primary modes). For any k “ ´1, 0, 1 and 0 ď t ď
T1, one has

˜Ekptq “

`

1
2

akptq2 ` bkptq2 ` ckptq2 ` dkptq2

˘

`

` O

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2

˘

.

Proof. By (6.51) it suﬃces to show that

ż

T1

˜Ekptq dt À 1.

The portion of the integral with 0 ď t ď T1 is controlled by (6.92), (6.93), and the
(cid:3)
trivial bound T1 ď 100. The claim now follows from Lemma 6.7.

τn0´N

The bounds (6.92)-(6.95) look like an inﬁnite number of conditions, but note from the
qualitative decay property (6.44) that

sup
0ďtď100

p1 ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q20kq ˜Ekp0q ă 8,

sup
kPZ

which implies that the bounds (6.92), (6.94) are automatically satisﬁed for all m ě M
and some ﬁnite M (independent of T1). So there are really only a ﬁnite number of
conditions in the deﬁnition of T1. As ˜Em and d1 vary continuously in time, we conclude
that either T1 “ 100, or that at least one of the inequalities (6.92)-(6.94) is obeyed with
equality (for some m) at time t “ T1. In particular, from Lemma 6.8 we see that T1 ‰ 0,
thus 0 ă T1 ď 100.

Now we use local energy estimates to rule out several of the ways in which one can
“exit” the bounds (6.92)-(6.95).

62

TERENCE TAO

Lemma 6.10 (Closing some exits). We have

and

and

˜E1´mpT1q ă K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0qm{10 for all m ě 3

˜E1`mpT1q ă K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´10m for all m ě 1

˜E0pT1q ` ˜E1pT1q ă 1.

(6.96)

(6.97)

(6.98)

Proof. Integrating (6.49) on r0, T1s, we conclude that

˜EkpT1q ď ˜Ekp0q ` Kp1 ` (cid:15)0q5k{2

d2
k´1akptq ´ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2d2

kak`1ptq dt

(6.99)

for any k P Z; summing this for k “ 0 and k “ 1 and using (6.86), we conclude the
variant

˜E0pT1q ` ˜E1pT1q ď 0.6 ` K

´1a0ptq ´ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5d2
d2

1a2ptq dt.

(6.100)

ż

T1

0

ż

T1

From (6.92), (6.93), (6.94) we have

0

and hence from (6.100)

´1a0ptq ´ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5d2
d2

1a2ptq “ OpK ´5q

˜E0pT1q ` ˜E1pT1q ď 0.6 ` OpK ´4q

giving (6.98) for K large enough.

Now suppose that m ě 3. From (6.99) with k “ 1 ´ m and (6.85), we have

˜E1´mpT1q ď p1 ` (cid:15)0q´0.08K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0qm{10

ˆ

ż

T1

˙

` O

Kp1 ` (cid:15)0q´5m{2

|d´m|2|a1´m|ptq ` |d1´m|2|a2´mptq| dt

.

From (6.92) (and now using the hypothesis m ě 3) we have

0

|d´m|2|a1´m|ptq ` |d1´m|2|a2´mptq| À K ´15p1 ` (cid:15)0q3m{20

for 0 ď t ď T1, and so (since T1 ď 100)
´
p1 ` (cid:15)0q´0.09 ` O

˜E1´mpT1q ď K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0qm{10

and (6.96) follows (assuming K large enough).

´
K ´4p1 ` (cid:15)0q´p 5

2 ´ 1

20 qm

¯¯

Similarly, if m ě 1, we may apply (6.99) with k “ 1 ` m and use (6.87) to obtain

ˆ

ż

T1

˙

˜E1`mpT1q ď p1`(cid:15)0q´9.98K ´30p1`(cid:15)0q´10m`O

Kp1 ` (cid:15)0q5m{2

|dm|2|am`1|ptq ` |dm`1|2|am`2ptq| dt

.

From (6.94) (and (6.95) when m “ 1) we have

|dk´1|2|ak|ptq ` |dk|2|ak`1|ptq À K ´35p1 ` (cid:15)0q´15m

for 0 ď t ď T1, and thus

˜E1`mpT1q ď K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q´10m

`

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´9.98 ` O

`

K ´4p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5m{2

˘˘

0

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

and (6.97) follows (assuming K large enough).

63

(cid:3)

From this lemma and the previous discussion, we have some partial control on how we
exit the regime:

Corollary 6.11 (Exit trichotomy). At least one of the following assertions hold:

‚ (Backwards ﬂow of energy) We have

˜E´1pT1q “ K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0q2{10.

‚ (Forwards ﬂow of energy) We have

|d1pT1q| “

1
2

K ´10.

‚ (Running out the clock) We have

T1 “ 100.

(6.101)

(6.102)

(6.103)

Although we will not need this fact here, it turns out (using a reﬁnement of the analysis
below) that it is option (6.102) which actually occurs in this trichotomy.

Thanks to (6.92)-(6.95), the task of proving Proposition 6.5 has now reduced to the
following claim:

Proposition 6.12 (Reduced induction claim). Let the notation and hypotheses be as
in Proposition 6.5, and let T1 be deﬁned as above. There exists a time

1
100

ď τ1 ď T1

(in particular, T1 ě 1{100) and an amplitude

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´1{100 ď µ1 ď p1 ` (cid:15)0q1{100

such that we have the bounds

a1pτ1q “ µ1
|b1pτ1q| ď 10´5εµ1
|c1pτ1q| ď 10´5 expp´K 10qε2µ1
c1pτ1q ě ´p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{4µ1
˜E0pτ1q ď K ´20µ2
1
b0pτ1q ě 10´5εµ1
b0pτ1q ď 105εµ1
c0pτ1q ě exppK 9qε2µ1
c0pτ1q ď exppK 10qε2µ1.

(6.104)

(6.105)

(6.106)

(6.107)

(6.108)

(6.109)

(6.110)

(6.111)

(6.112)

(6.113)

(6.114)

Indeed, the remaining claims (6.73), (6.79), (6.80), (6.81) of Proposition 6.5 follow for
τ1 obeying (6.104) from (6.92)-(6.95) (using (6.105) to handle the µ1 factor in (6.73)).

64

TERENCE TAO

6.6. Sixth step: eliminating the role of b1, c1, d1. We now begin the proof of Propo-
sition 6.12. Henceforth the notation and assumptions are as in that proposition.

It turns out that we can reduce to the setting in which the dynamics of b1, c1, d1 are
essentially trivial. The key proposition is

Proposition 6.13 (Small a1 implies small b1, c1, d1). Suppose that 0 ď τ ď T1 is a time
such that

ż

τ

a1ptq2 dt ď K ´1{4

Then we have the bounds

0

|b1ptq| À K ´1{4ε
|c1ptq| À K ´1{4 expp´K 10{2qε2
c1ptq ě ´Opp1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{3q

|d1ptq| À K ´20

for all 0 ď t ď τ .

Proof. We ﬁrst observe from (6.66) that

˜E1ptq À K ´30p1 ` (cid:15)0q10k

(6.115)

(6.116)

(6.117)

(6.118)

(6.119)

whenever n0 ´ N ă k ď 0 and τk´1 ď t ď τk. From this and (6.53) we conclude the
crude bound

˜E1ptq À

K ´30
1 ` |t|3

whenever τn0´N ď t ď 0.

Let τ 1 be the largest time in rτn0´N , τ s for which

ż

τ 1

τn0´N

|b1ptq| dt ď

From continuity we see that either τ 1 “ τ , or else

ż

τ 1

τn0´N

|b1ptq| dt “

1
10

ε.

1
10

ε.

(6.120)

(6.121)

(6.122)

We rule out the latter possibility as follows. From (6.47) one has
´
¯
p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2 ˜E1{2

´
ε2 expp´K 10q ˜E1

` p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2ε´1K 10|b1||c1| ` O

|Btc1| ď O

1

¯

and

Btc1 ě ´Opp1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2 ˜E1q ´ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2ε´1K 10|b1||c1|

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

65

for all t ě τn0´N , while from (6.50) one has c1pτn0´N q “ 0. From Gronwall’s inequality
and (6.121), we conclude that
|c1ptq| À exppp1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2 1
10
ż
t

K 10qˆ

¸¸

˜

˜

ż

t

ε2 expp´K 10q

τn0´N

˜E1pt1q dt1 ` O

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2

τn0´N

˜E1pt1q1{2 dt1

and

c1ptq ě ´Opexppp1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2 1
10

K 10qp1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2

ż

t

τn0´N

˜E1pt1q1{2 dt1q

for any τn0´N ď t ď τ 1. In particular, from (6.120) and (6.93) we have

and

|c1ptq| À

ε2 expp´3K ´10{4q
1 ` |t|2

`

`

c1ptq ě ´O

exp

OpK 10qp1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2

˘˘

(6.123)

(6.124)

for all τn0´N ď t ď τ 1 (here we use the trivial bound τ 1 ď τ ď T1 ď 100).

In a similar spirit, from (6.46) one has

|Btb1| ď εa2

1 ` ε´1K 10c2

1 ` O

´
p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0 ˜E1{2

1

¯

for all t ě τn0´N , and hence by (6.50)

ż

t

|b1ptq| ď

τn0´N

εa2

1pt1q ` ε´1K 10c2

1pt1q ` O

´
p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0 ˜E1{2

1

¯

dt1

In particular, from (6.123), (6.120), (6.115) we have

|b1ptq| À

K ´30
1 ` |t|2 ε

for τn0´N ď t ď 0, and

|b1ptq| À K ´1{4ε
(6.125)
for 0 ď t ď τ 1. However, this is inconsistent with (6.122) if K is small enough (recalling
that τ 1 ď 100). Thus τ 1 “ τ . The bounds (6.116), (6.117), (6.118) now follow from
(6.123), (6.124), (6.125).

Finally, from (6.48) and (6.117), (6.93), (6.94) we have

`

`

˘˘

Btd1 “ O

exp

´K 10{2

` OpK ´14|d1|q

for 0 ď t ď τ 1 (taking n0 large enough), and from this, (6.88), and Gronwall’s inequality
(cid:3)
one obtains (6.119) (for K large enough).

Let T2 be the largest time in r0, T1s such that

ż

0

T2

a1ptq2 dt ď K ´1{4.

66

TERENCE TAO

Combining Proposition 6.13 with Corollary 6.11 and using continuity, we conclude

Corollary 6.14 (Exit trichotomy, again). At least one of the following assertions hold:

‚ (Backwards ﬂow of energy) One has

˜E´1pT2q “ K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0q2{10.

‚ (Forwards ﬂow of energy) One has

ż

T2

a1ptq2 dt “ K ´1{4.

‚ (Running out the clock) One has

0

T2 “ 100.

(6.126)

(6.127)

(6.128)

Again, it turns out that it is option (6.127) that actually occurs, although we will not
quite prove (or use) this assertion here.

The most important modes for the remainder of the analysis are a0, b0, c0, d0, and a1.
From (6.45)-(6.48), the energy bounds (6.92)-(6.94), and Proposition 6.13, we observe
the equations of motion

`

˘

`

K ´9

Bta0 “ ´ε´2c0d0 ` O
Btb0 “ εa2
0 ´ ε´1K 10c2
Btc0 “ ε2 expp´K 10qa2
Btd0 “ ε´2c0a0 ´ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2Kd0a1 ` O
Bta1 “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2Kd2

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2
0 ` O
0 ` ε´1K 10b0c0 ` O
`

0 ` OpK ´1|a1|q ` O

˘

`

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2

˘

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2
`

˘

K ´20

˘

(6.129)

(6.130)

(6.131)

(6.132)

(6.133)

for these modes in the time interval 0 ď t ď T2. When N ą n0, we also need to keep
some track of the modes a´1, b´1, c´1, d´1; again from (6.45)-(6.48) and (6.92)-(6.94),
these equations may be given as

Bta´1 “ ´p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2ε´2c´1d´1 ` O
Btb´1 “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2εa2
Btc´1 “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2ε2 expp´K 10qa2

´1 ´ p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2ε´1K 10c2

´1 ` O
´1 ` p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2ε´1K 10b´1c´1 ` O

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2

`

`

`

˘

K ´9

Btd´1 “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2ε´2c´1a´1 ´ Kd´1a0 ` O

`

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2

˘

.

˘

(6.134)

(6.135)

˘

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2

(6.136)

(6.137)

The dynamics of these variables a´1, b´1, c´1, d´1, do not directly impact the dynamics
in (6.129)-(6.133); however we will still need to track these variables in order to prevent
a premature exit of the form (6.126) that could potentially be caused by energy ﬂowing
back from a0 to d´1.

The task of proving Proposition 6.12 has now reduced further, to that of establishing
the following claim.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

67

Proposition 6.15 (Reduced induction claim, II). Let the notation and hypotheses be
as in Proposition 6.5, and let T1 and T2 be deﬁned as above. There exists a time

1
100

ď τ1 ď T2

(in particular, T2 ě 1{100) such that we have the bounds

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´1{100 ď a1pτ1q ď p1 ` (cid:15)0q1{100

b0pτ1q ě 2 ˆ 10´5ε
1
2

b0pτ1q ď

105ε

c0pτ1q ě 2 ˆ exppK 9qε2

c0pτ1q ď

˜E0pτ1q ď

1
2
1
2

exppK 10qε2

K ´20,

(6.138)

(6.139)

(6.140)

(6.141)

(6.142)

(6.143)

(6.144)

Indeed, Proposition 6.12 follows from Proposition 6.15 and Proposition 6.13 once we
set µ1 :“ a1pτ1q (and take K suﬃciently large, ε suﬃciently small, and n0 suﬃciently
large).

6.7. Seventh step: dynamics at the zero scale. We now prove Proposition 6.15
(and hence Propositions 6.12, 6.4, 6.3 and Theorems 6.2, 4.2, 3.3 and 1.5).

The task at hand is now very close to the situation in Theorem 5.3, and we will now
repeat the proof of that theorem with minor modiﬁcations, except for a technical dis-
traction having to do with eliminating a premature exercise of the option (6.126), which
requires some analysis of the ´1-scale dynamics.

From (6.93) we have

(6.145)
a0ptq, b0ptq, c0ptq, d0ptq, a1ptq “ Op1q
for all 0 ď t ď T2. Actually, we can do a bit better than this. From (6.129)-(6.133) and
(6.145) we have

0 ` d2
for 0 ď t ď T2 (if n0 is large enough), whereas from (6.54)-(6.58) and (6.66) we have
a0p0q2 ` b0p0q2 ` c0p0q2 ` d0p0q2 ` a1p0q2 “ 1 ` OpK ´20q.

1q “ OpK ´1q

0 ` a2

0 ` c2

0 ` b2

Btpa2

By the fundamental theorem of calculus, we conclude that

a0ptq2 ` b0ptq2 ` c0ptq2 ` d0ptq2 ` a1ptq2 “ 1 ` OpK ´1q

(6.146)

for all 0 ď t ď T2.

Now (as in the proof of Theorem 5.3) we obtain improved bounds on b, c. From (6.130),
(6.131), (6.145) one has

Btpb2

0 ` c2

0q “ 2εa2

0b0 ` 2ε2 expp´K 10qa2

0c0 ` O

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2pb2

0 ` c2

0q1{2

`

˘

68

TERENCE TAO

for all 0 ď t ď T2, and thus by (6.146)
0 ` c2

Btpb2

0q1{2 ď p1 ` OpK ´1qqε

for all 0 ď t ď T2 (interpreting the derivative in a weak sense). On the other hand,
from (6.55), (6.56) we have

pb0p0q2 ` c0p0q2q1{2 ď p10´5 ` OpK ´1qqε.

From the fundamental theorem of calculus, we conclude that
|b0ptq|, |c0ptq| ď p10´5 ` t ` OpK ´1qqε

(6.147)

for all 0 ď t ď T2. Inserting this (and (6.146)) into (6.131), we obtain

|Btc0| ď Opε2 expp´K 10qq `

`

˘
10´5 ` t ` OpK ´1q

K 10|c0|

for all 0 ď t ď T2. In particular, by (6.56) and Gronwall’s inequality, we have the bound

ˆ

ˆ

˙˙

|c0ptq| À ε2 exp

K 10

t2 ` OpK ´1q

(6.148)

´

1
4

` 10´5t `

1
2

for all 0 ď t ď T2. Finally, from (6.132), (6.133) we have

`

˘

`

`

˘˘

´

Bt

d2
0 ` a2
1

“ 2ε´2c0a0d0 ` O

K ´1

d2
0 ` a2
1

` O

K ´20

`

d2
0 ` a2
1

¯

˘

1{2

for all 0 ď t ď T2, and hence by (6.145)
˘

`

Bt

0 ` a2
d2
1

1{2

“ Opε´2|c0|q ` O

´

K ´1

`

0 ` a2
d2
1

¯

˘

1{2

` OpK ´20q

(6.149)

for all 0 ď t ď T2 (interpreted in a weak sense). From (6.58), (6.66) we have

`

˘

d0p0q2 ` a1p0q2

1{2

“ OpK ´10q

(6.150)

and hence by (6.148) and Gronwall’s inequality

ˆ

ˆ

|d0ptq|, |a1ptq| À exp

K 10

´1{4 ` 10´5t `

˙˙

t2 ` OpK ´1q

` K ´10

(6.151)

1
2

for all 0 ď t ď T2. Inserting this bound into (6.129), we see that
ˆ
˘

ˆ

`

˙˙

|Bta0| À exp

2K 10

´1{4 ` 10´5t `

t2 ` O

K ´1

` K ´9

1
2

for all 0 ď t ď T2, which among other things implies (from (6.54)) that a0ptq ě 0
whenever 0 ď t ď minpT2, 1{2q. From the k “ ´1 case of (6.49), we thus have

˜E´1 ď Kp1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2d2
for 0 ď t ď minpT2, 1{2q; by (6.92) we conclude that
˜E´1 ď OpK ´14q

Bt

Bt

´2a´1

on this interval, and hence by (6.85)

˜E´1 pminpT2, 1{2qq ď K ´10 p1 ` (cid:15)0q2{10

`

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´0.08 ` O

`

˘˘

,

K ´4

which rules out the ﬁrst option of Corollary 6.14 if T2 ď 1{2. The second option of this
corollary is also ruled out when T2 ď 1{2, thanks to (6.151). We conclude that

T2 ě 1{2.

(6.152)

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

69

Now we sharpen the bounds on a0ptq, b0ptq, c0ptq, d0ptq, a1ptq. Let tc be the supremum
of all the times t P r0, T2s for which |cpt1q| ď K ´10ε2 for all 0 ď t ď t1, thus

and

0 ď tc ď T2 ď T1 ď 100

|c0ptq| ď K ´10ε2

for all 0 ď t ď tc. Comparing this with (6.148), (6.152), we conclude that

From (6.149), (6.150), (6.153), and Gronwall’s inequality one has

|d0ptq|, |a1ptq| À K ´10

tc ě 1{2.

(6.153)

(6.154)

(6.155)

for all 0 ď t ď tc. Inserting these bounds and (6.147) back into (6.129), we see that

for 0 ď t ď tc, and thus by (6.54) we have

Bta0 “ OpK ´9q

a0ptq “ 1 ` OpK ´9q

(6.156)

for 0 ď t ď tc. Inserting this into (6.130) and using (6.153), we conclude that

Btb0ptq “ ε

1 ` O

`

`

˘˘

K ´9

for 0 ď t ď tc, and hence by (6.55)
`
K ´9

t ´ 10´5 ´ O

`

ε

˘˘

`

ď b0ptq ď ε

t ` 10´5 ` O

˘˘

`

K ´9

(6.157)

for all 0 ď t ď tc. Meanwhile, inserting (6.156) into (6.131), we obtain
ε2 expp´K 10q ` ε´1K 10b0ptqc0ptq

˘
1 ` OpK ´9q

Btc0ptq ě

`

for all 0 ď t ď tc, and hence by (6.57), (6.157) and Gronwall’s inequality we see that

˙

˙

c0ptq Á exp

t2 ´ 10´5t ´ 1 ` OpK ´9q

K 10

ε2

ˆˆ

1
2

whenever 1{2 ď t ď tc. Comparing this with (6.153) we see that

(say), which by deﬁnition of (6.153) implies that

c0ptcq “ K ´10ε2.

tc ď 2

(6.158)

(6.159)

Having described the evolution up to time tc, we now move to the future of tc, and
speciﬁcally in the interval rtc, τ1s where

τ1 :“ minptc ` K ´1{2, T2q.

(6.160)

From (6.155) we have

ż

tc

0

a1ptq2 dt À K ´10

and hence by (6.93) and (6.160) we have

ż

t

0

a1ptq2 dt ă K ´1{4

whenever t ď τ1. From this and Corollary 6.14 (and (6.158)) we conclude

70

TERENCE TAO

Proposition 6.16 (Exit dichotomy). At least one of the following assertions hold:

‚ (Backwards ﬂow of energy) One has

˜E´1pτ1q “ K ´10p1 ` (cid:15)0q2{10.

‚ (Running out the clock) One has

τ1 “ tc ` K ´1{2.

(6.161)

(6.162)

We will shortly eliminate the option (6.161), but ﬁrst we need more control on the
dynamics.

From (6.157) and (6.154) we have

b0ptcq ě 10´1ε.

Meanwhile, from (6.148), (6.130) (discarding the non-negative εa2

0 term) we have

`

`

`

˘˘˘

Btb0 ě ´O

ε3 exp

O

K 10

for all tc ď t ď τ1 (with n0 large enough); we conclude (for ε small enough) that

b0ptq ě 10´4ε
(say) for all tc ď t ď τ1. Inserting this bound into (6.131), and discarding the non-
negative ε2 expp´K 10qa2

0 term, we see from (6.159) and a continuity argument that

(6.163)

c0ptq ě K ´10ε2
for tc ď t ď τ1 (in particular, c0 is positive on this interval), and furthermore that we
have the exponential growth

(6.164)

Btc0ptq Á K 10c0ptq

(6.165)

for tc ď t ď τ1. We conclude that

c0ptq ě K 100ε2
(6.166)
for t in the interval I :“ rtc ` K ´9, τ1s. (We have not yet ruled out the possibility that
this time interval is empty, although we will shortly show that this is not the case.) In
the opposite direction, we see from (6.145), (6.147), (6.164), (6.131) that

Btc0 À K 10c0
for tc ď t ď τ1. From (6.159), (6.160), and Gronwall’s inequality, we thus have the
upper bound

(6.167)

c0ptq À exp

(6.168)
for tc ď t ď τ1. Crucially, this upper bound will be signiﬁcantly smaller than a lower
bound for c´1 in the same interval, leading to an important mismatch in speeds between
the 0-scale and ´1-scale dynamics that prevents a premature exit via (6.161). More
precisely, we have

`

˘
OpK 10´1{2q

ε2

Proposition 6.17 (No exit to coarse scales). We have

˜E´1ptq À K ´14

for all tc ď t ď τ1. In particular, by Proposition 6.16 we have

τ1 “ tc ` K ´1{2

(6.169)

(6.170)

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

71

and hence the interval I “ rtc ` K ´9, τ1s is non-empty.

Proof. If N “ n0 then this is immediate from (6.52), so we may assume that N ą n0.
In particular, the bounds (6.60)-(6.63) are available.

We will need some additional bounds on b´1, c´1. From (6.135), (6.92) (discarding the
second term in (6.135) as being non-positive) we have

for all 0 ď t ď τ1. From this and (6.61), we have

Btb´1ptq ď Opεq

for 0 ď t ď τ1. Meanwhile, from (6.136) (using (6.92) to bound a´1) we have

Bt|c´1|2 “ Opε2|c´1|q ` 2p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2ε´1K 10b´1|c´1|2

b´1ptq ď Opεq

(6.171)

and thus by (6.171)

and thus

Bt|c´1|2ptq ď Opε2|c´1|q ` O

`

K 10|c´1|2

˘

Bt|c´1|ptq ď Opε2q ` O

`

K 10|c´1|

˘

.

By Gronwall’s inequality and (6.63), we thus have

|c´1ptq| À exp

O

`

`

˘˘

ε2

(6.172)

K 10

for 0 ď t ď τ1. Inserting this back into (6.135), we see that
ε3

Btb´1 ě ´O

K 10

exp

˘˘˘

O

`

`

`

and hence by (6.60)

b´1ptq ě 10´6ε

for 0 ď t ď τ1 (if ε is small enough). Inserting this into (6.136), we see that

Btc´1 ě 10´6K 10c´1 ´ O

for 0 ď t ď τ1, and hence by (6.62)

`

p1 ` (cid:15)0q´n0{2

˘

c´1ptq ě expp10´8K 10qε2
for 1{10 ď t ď τ1 (if n0 is large enough). Returning to (6.135), we now have (thanks to
(6.172)) that

(6.173)

for 0 ď t ď τ1, and thus by (6.61)

Btb´1ptq “ Opεq

b´1ptq “ Opεq

for 0 ď t ď τ1; from (6.136), (6.173), (6.92) we now have
Btc´1ptq “ OpK 10c´1ptqq

for 0 ď t ď τ1.

From (6.85) we have

˜E´1p0q À K ´10.

(6.174)

(6.175)

(6.176)

72

TERENCE TAO

This bound is too big for (6.169), so we will ﬁrst need to establish some decay in ˜E´1
as one moves from time t “ 0 to time t “ tc. From (6.49) we have

From (6.92) we have d2

˜E´1 ď Kp1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2d2

´2a´1 ´ Kd2
Bt
´2a´1ptq “ OpK ´15q for 0 ď t ď τ1, so

´1a0

˜E´1 ď ´Kd2

Bt

´1a0 ` OpK ´14q

(6.177)
´1 oscillates around ˜E´1 on the

for 0 ď t ď τ1. Equipartition of energy suggests that d2
average. To formalise this, observe from (6.134), (6.137), (6.92) that

`

˘

Btpa´1d´1q “ p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2ε´2c´1

´1 ´ d2
a2
´1

´ Ka´1d´1a0 ` OpK ´14q

ˆ

and hence by the product rule
ε2
c´1

a´1d´1

a0

Bt

˙

“ p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2

`

´1 ´ d2
a2
´1
ˆ

Bta0 ` O

˘

a0 ´

ε2
c´1
K ´14 ε2
c´1

˙

` a´1d´1

ε2
c´1

Btc´1
c´1

a´1d´1 ´

ε2
c´1

Ka´1d´1a2
0

for 0 ď t ď τ1. from (6.129), (6.93), (6.168) we have

`

`

`

Bta0 “ O

exp

O

K 10´1{2

˘˘˘

.

Using (6.173), (6.175), (6.79), we conclude that
`

˙

ˆ

Bt

a´1d´1

a0

“ p1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2

a2
´1 ´ d2
´1

ε2
c´1

˘

˘

`

K ´100

a0 ` O

for 0 ď t ď T˚. If we deﬁne the modiﬁed energy

E˚ :“ ˜E´1 ´

1
2

p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2Ka´1d´1

ε2
c´1

a0

then from (6.173), (6.92) we have

while from (6.177) we have

E˚ “ ˜E´1 ` OpK ´100q

(6.178)

1
2
for 0 ď t ď τ1. By Lemma 6.9, (6.174), (6.172) we have

Kp1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2

´1 ` d2
a2
´1

BtE˚ ď ´

`

˘

˘

`

K ´14

a0 ` O

and thus by (6.178)

˜E´1 “

´1 ` d2
a2
´1

˘

` Opε2q

`

1
2

BtE˚ ď ´

1
2

Kp1 ` (cid:15)0q´5{2E˚a0 ` O

˘

`

K ´14

From (6.176) we have E˚p0q À K ´10, and by (6.178) it will suﬃce to show that E˚ptq À
K ´14 for tc ď t ď τ1. By Gronwall’s inequality, it thus suﬃces to show that
t

ż

a0pt1q dt1 Á 1

0

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

for all tc ď t ď τ1. But from (6.93) and the bound τ1 ď tc ` K ´1{2 we have

ż

ż

t

a0pt1q dt1 “

tc

a0pt1q dt1 ` OpK ´1{2q

0
and the claim now follows from (6.156) and (6.154).

0

73

(cid:3)

We now resume the analysis of the 0-scale modes. From Proposition 6.17 and (6.45)
(and (6.93)), we see that we can improve the error term in (6.129) to

Bta0 “ ´ε´2c0d0 ` O

K ´14

`

˘

(6.179)

in the interval tc ď t ď τ1. This improvement will be needed in order to close the
bootstrap argument.

From (6.130), (6.93), (6.168) we have

for tc ď t ď τ1, and hence by (6.157) and (6.163) we have

|Btb0| ď 10ε

|b0| ď 104ε

(6.180)

for tc ď t ď τ1. Inserting this into (6.131) and using (6.166), (6.93) we have

|Btc0ptq| À K 10c0ptq
for tc ď t ď τ1; combining this with (6.167) we have

K 10c0ptq À Btc0ptq À K 10c0ptq.

(6.181)

Now we use equipartition of energy to establish some energy drain from a0, d0 to a1.
From (6.179), (6.132), (6.93), (6.94) one has
´

¯

pa2

0 ` d2

0q “ ´p1 ` (cid:15)0q5{2Kd2

0a1 ` O

K ´14

0 ` d2
a2
0

` OpK ´100q

(6.182)

`

˘

1{2

1
2

Bt

and

0 ´ d2
a2
0
for t P I. Meanwhile, from (6.133), (6.93) we have

Bt pa0d0q “ ε´2c0

`

˘

` OpKq

Bta1 “ OpKq.

From this and (6.166), (6.181) that
˙

ˆ

Bt

a0d0

a1

“ ´pa2

0 ´ d2

ε2
c0

“ ´pa2
for t P I, so if we deﬁne the modiﬁed energy
˘

0 ´ d2

`

ε2
c0

0qa1 ´ a0d0

Btc0
c0
0qa1 ` OpK ´100q

E˚ :“

0 ` d2
a2
0

1
2

`

1
2

Ka0d0

ε2
c0

a1

a1 ` a0d0

ε2
c0

Bta0 ` OpK ´100q

(6.183)

then from (5.32), (6.93), (6.94) we have

E˚ “ ˜E0 ` OpK ´100q “

˘

0 ` d2
a2
0

`

1
2

` OpK ´100q

(6.184)

74

and

TERENCE TAO

BtE˚ “ ´

`

1
2

K

˘

0 ` d2
a2
0

´

a1 ` O

K ´14

`

0 ` d2
a2
0

¯

˘

1{2

` OpK ´99q

for t P I, and hence

BtE˚ “ ´Ka1E˚ ` O

`

K ´14E1{2

˚

˘

` OpK ´99q

and hence

`

Bt

E˚ ` K ´28

˘

1{2

`

“

1
2

Ka1

˘

1{2

E˚ ` K ´28

` OpK ´14q

for t P I. Starting with the crude bound E˚ptc ` K ´9q À 1 from (6.184), (6.93), we
conclude from Gronwall’s inequality that

`

E˚ptq ` K ´28

˘

1{2

ˆ

ż

t

1
2

K

À exp

´

˙

apt1q dt1

` OpK ´14q

tc`K´9

for any t P I. In particular, from (6.184) we have

ˆ

ż

t

˙

˜E0ptq À exp

´K

for t P I.

From (6.133) we have

apt1q dt1

` OpK ´28q

(6.185)

tc`K´9

Bta1 ě OpK ´1|a1|q ` OpK ´20q

for t P I. In particular, if we can show

then by Gronwall’s inequality we will have

a1ptc ` 1{Kq ě 0.1

a1ptq ě 0.05

for all tc ` 1{K ď t ď τ1 “ tc ` 1{K 1{2, and in particular from (6.185) we have

giving (6.144).

˜E0pτ1q À K ´28

(6.186)

(6.187)

(6.188)

(6.189)

We now show (6.187). Suppose this is not the case. From (6.133), (6.155), (6.146) we
have

a1ptc ` K ´9q À K ´1

so from (6.133), (6.94), and the failure of (6.187) we have

ż

tc`1{K

Kd0ptq2 dt ď 0.1 ` OpK ´1q

and thus

tc`K´9

ż

tc`1{K

tc`K´9

d0ptq2 dt ď

1
10K

` OpK ´2q.

However, by repeating the derivation of (6.183) we have

Btpa0d0

ε2
c0

q “ ´pa2

0 ´ d2

0q ` OpK ´100q

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

75

on I, and hence by the fundamental theorem of calculus and (5.32) we have

ż

tc`1{K

a0ptq2 ´ d0ptq2 dt “ OpK ´100q

tc`K´9

and thus

ż

tc`1{K

tc`K´9

1
2

pa2

0 ` d2

0qptq dt ď

1
10K

` OpK ´2q.

(6.190)

On the other hand, for t P rtc `K ´9, tc `1{Ks one has a1ptq ď 0.1`OpK ´20q by (6.186),
the failure of (6.187), and Gronwall’s inequality. From (6.146), (6.184) we conclude that

which contradicts (6.190). This concludes the proof of (6.187) and hence (6.144).

0 ` d2
a2

0ptq ě 0.99 ` OpK ´1q,

To ﬁnish up, we need to establish the bounds (6.139)-(6.143) (the bounds (6.138) coming
from (6.154) and construction of τ1). From (6.146), (6.189) we have

a1ptq2 “ 1 ` OpK ´1q
and (6.139) follows from this and (6.188). The bounds (6.140), (6.141) follow from
(6.180) and (6.163), while the bounds (6.142), (6.143) follows from (6.159), (6.181),
(6.170), and Gronwall’s inequality. This (ﬁnally!) completes the proof of Proposition
6.15, and hence of Theorem 1.5.

References

[1] Adamatzky, A. (ed.), Game of life cellular automata. Springer, 2010.
[2] A. Adamatzky, J. Durand-Lose, Collision-Based Computing, Handbook of Natural Computing, G.

Rozenberg, T. B¨ack, J. Kok editors, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012.

[3] N. Alibaud, J. Droniou, J. Vovelle, Occurrence and non-appearance of shocks in fractal Burgers

equations, J. Hyperbolic Diﬀer. Equ. 4 (2007), no. 3, 479–499.

[4] D. Barbato, F. Morandin, M. Romito, Smooth solutions for the dyadic model, Nonlinearity 24

(2011), no. 11, 3083–3097.

[5] D. Barbato, F. Morandin, M. Romito, Global regularity for a logarithmically supercritical hyper-

dissipative dyadic equation, preprint. arXiv:1403.2852

[6] D. Barbato, F. Morandin, M. Romito, Global regularity for a slightly supercritical hyperdissipative

Navier-Stokes system, preprint. arXiv:1407.6734

[7] D. Li, Ya. Sinai, Blow ups of complex solutions of the 3d-Navier-Stokes system and renormalization

group method, J. Eur. Math. Soc. 10 (2008), no. 2, pages 267-313.

[8] P. Benioﬀ, Quantum mechanical hamiltonian models of Turing machines, J. Stat. Phys. 29 (1982),

515–546.

[9] J.-Y. Chemin, I. Gallagher, M. Paicu, Global regularity for some classes of large solutions to the

Navier-Stokes equations, Ann. of Math. 173 (2011), no. 2, 983–1012.

[10] A. Cheskidov, Blow-up in ﬁnite time for the dyadic model of the Navier-Stokes equations, Trans.

Am. Math. Soc. 360 (2010), 5101–5120.

[11] V. N. Desnjanskii, E. A. Novikov, Simulation of cascade processes in turbulent ﬂows, Prikl. Mat.

Mek. 38 507–13.

[12] H. Dong, D. Du, D. Li, Finite time singularities and global well-posedness for fractal Burgers

equations, Indiana Univ. Math. J. 58 (2009), no. 2, 807–821.

[13] C. Feﬀerman, Existence and smoothness of the Navier-Stokes equation, The millennium prize

problems, Clay Math. Inst., Cambridge, MA, 2006, pp. 57–67.

[14] S. Friedlander, N. Pavlovic, Remarks concerning modiﬁed Navier-Stokes equations, Partial diﬀer-
ential equations and applications. Discrete Contin. Dyn. Syst. 10 (2004), no. 1-2, 269–288.

76

TERENCE TAO

[15] S. Friedlander, N. Pavlovic, Blowup in a three-dimensional vector model for the Euler equations,

Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 57 (2004), 705–725.

[16] L. Escauriaza, G. A. Seregin, V. Sver´ak. L3,8-solutions of Navier-Stokes equations and backward

uniqueness, Uspekhi Mat. Nauk, 58 (2003), 3–44.

[17] I. Gallagher, M. Paicu, Remarks on the blow-up of solutions to a toy model for the Navier-Stokes

equations, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 137 (2009), no. 6, 2075–2083.

[18] A. Kiselev, F. Nazarov, R. Shterenberg, Blow up and regularity for fractal Burgers equation, Dyn.

Partial Diﬀer. Equ. 5 (2008), no. 3, 211–240.

[19] D. Graca, M. Campagnolo, J. Buescu, Robust Simulations of Turing Machines with Analytic Maps
and Flows, New Computational Paradigms Lecture Notes in Computer Science Volume 3526, 2005,
pp 169–179.

[20] R. Grundy, R. McLaughlin, Three-dimensional blow-up solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations,

IMA J. Appl. Math. 63 (1999), no. 3, pages 287–306.

[21] T. Hou, Z. Lei, On the stabilizing eﬀect of convection in three-dimensional incompressible ﬂows,

Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 62 (2009), no. 4, 501–564.

[22] T. Y. Hou, R. Li, Blowup or no blowup? The interplay between theory and numerics, Physica D

237 (2008), 1937–1944.

[23] T. Y. Hou, Z. Lei, G. Luo, S. Wang, C. Zou, On Finite Time Singularity and Global Regularity of
an Axisymmetric Model for the 3D Euler Equations, Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis,
January 2014.

[24] T. Y. Hou, Z. Shi, S. Wang, On singularity formation of a 3D model for incompressible Navier-

Stokes equations, Adv. Math. 230 (2012), no. 2, 607-641.

[25] N. Katz, N. Pavlovic, A cheap Caﬀarelli-Kohn-Nirenberg inequality for the Navier-Stokes equation

with hyper-dissipation, Geom. Funct. Anal. 12 (2002), no. 2, 355–379.

[26] N. H. Katz, N. Pavlovic, Finite time blow-up for a dyadic model of the Euler equations, Trans.

Am. Math. Soc. 357 695–708.

[27] N. H. Katz, A. Tapay, A note on the slightly supercritical Navier Stokes equations in the plane,

preprint.

[28] C. Kenig, G. Koch, An alternative approach to regularity for the Navier-Stokes equations in critical

spaces, Ann. Inst. H. Poincar´e Anal. Non Lin´eaire 28 (2011), no. 2, 159–187.

[29] H. Koch, D. Tataru, Well-posedness for the Navier-Stokes equations, Adv. Math. 157 (2001), no.

1, 22–35.

[30] E. Lieb, M. Loss, Analysis, Graduate Studies in Mathematics 14, American Mathematical Society,

Providence RI, 2001.

[31] G. Luo, T. Hou, Potentially Singular Solutions of the 3D Incompressible Euler Equations, preprint.
[32] A. Majda, A. Bertozzi, Vorticity and incompressible ﬂow, Cambridge Texts in Applied Mathemat-

ics, Cambridge University Press, 2002.

[33] S. Montgomery-Smith, Finite time blow up for a Navier-Stokes like equation, Proc. Amer. Math.

Soc. 129 (2001), no. 10, 3025–3029.

[34] M. Nagayama, H. Okamoto and J. Zhu, On the blow-up of some similarity solutions of the Navier-
Stokes equations, Topics in mathematical ﬂuid mechanics, pages 137–162, Quad. Mat., 10, Dept.
Math., Seconda Univ. Napoli, Caserta, 2002.

[35] P. Plech´a¸c, V. S¸ver´ak, Singular and regular solutions of a nonlinear parabolic system, Nonlinearity

16 (2003), no. 6, 2083–2097.

[36] P. Plech´a¸c, V. S¸ver´ak, On self-similar singular solutions of the complex Ginzburg-Landau equation,

Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 54 (2001), no. 10, 1215–1242.

[37] M. Pour-El, J. Richards, Computability in analysis and physics. Perspectives in Mathematical

Logic. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1989.

[38] E. M. Stein, Singular integrals and diﬀerentiability properties of functions. Princeton Mathematical

Series, No. 30 Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J. 1970.

[39] T. Tao, Global regularity for a logarithmically supercritical hyperdissipative Navier-Stokes equation,

Anal. PDE 2 (2009), no. 3, 361–366.

[40] T. Tao, Structure and Randomness: pages from year one of a mathematical blog, American

Mathematical Society, 2008.

BLOWUP FOR AVERAGED NAVIER-STOKES

77

[41] T. Tao, Localisation and compactness properties of the Navier-Stokes global regularity problem,

Anal. PDE 6 (2013), no. 1, 25–107.

[42] F. Waleﬀe, On some dyadic models of the Euler equations, Proc. Am. Math. Soc. 134 (2006),

2913–2922.

[43] J. Wu, Global regularity for a class of generalized magnetohydrodynamic equations, J. Math. Fluid

Mech. 13 (2011), no. 2, 295–305.

UCLA Department of Mathematics, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1555.

E-mail address: tao@math.ucla.edu

